[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Intel.
[Amit Varma]: How do we see the world?
[Amit Varma]: A glib answer to that is differently.
[Amit Varma]: You and I can stand at a crowded intersection and look out into the world
[Amit Varma]: and see totally different things.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, we could look at the same rock and see two different rocks.
[Amit Varma]: The world is the seen and the unseen, and the scene is such a small part of it.
[Amit Varma]: This is why I love reading literature.
[Amit Varma]: Books open windows for us into other worlds,
[Amit Varma]: even when they are set in the same world as ours.
[Amit Varma]: For those who don't read, you have one life to live.
[Amit Varma]: For those who do read, there is no end to lives and to seeing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, while I do read a lot, my biggest complaint about myself is that I don't see enough.
[Amit Varma]: I go places, I do things, but I remain stuck inside my own head.
[Amit Varma]: But a writer has to learn to see.
[Amit Varma]: How else can you build worlds for others?
[Amit Varma]: This is why I enjoy chatting with novelists on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Each of them sees the world in a unique way.
[Amit Varma]: And when they share some of that with me, I can also see a little better.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Saira Rai, a writer, a novelist who straddles multiple languages and multiple worlds.
[Amit Varma]: Saira is a granddaughter of the great Munshi Premchand, the giant of Hindi literature.
[Amit Varma]: But she doesn't often like this fact mentioned because, hey,
[Amit Varma]: she stands out as a literary figure and as a person in her own right.
[Amit Varma]: She's equally at ease with Hindi, Urdu and English.
[Amit Varma]: And all her fiction, in fact, is written in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: But she's translated writers like Vinod Kumar Shukla into English, as well as some of her own work.
[Amit Varma]: I met Saira when I agreed to be on the jury of the JCB Literature Prize this year, and Saira was ahead of the jury.
[Amit Varma]: These are COVID times, so our jury meetings would happen on Zoom.
[Amit Varma]: The five of our jury members would gather to discuss a fixed number of books every week,
[Amit Varma]: and Saira would lead the discussion by talking about each book in detail.
[Amit Varma]: For me, and I think for all the other jury members, it was a jaw-dropping experience.
[Amit Varma]: She would talk about each book with such depth that she taught us not just something about the book all of us had read,
[Amit Varma]: but also something about reading itself.
[Amit Varma]: I figured that whenever we could meet in person, I simply had to record an episode with Saira.
[Amit Varma]: So finally, in the second week of November, we made it happen.
[Amit Varma]: She was passing through Mumbai, I invited her home for lunch and a recording in my home studio,
[Amit Varma]: and we had the conversation you will hear now.
[Amit Varma]: I loved having this conversation, and I loved listening to it again later,
[Amit Varma]: because I love books and writing, and Saira reminds me why.
[Amit Varma]: Listen in, I think you'll like it as well.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: As I mentioned in commercials in previous episodes,
[Amit Varma]: Intel's 11th Gen vPro platform helps companies boost their performance and security.
[Amit Varma]: And it does more than this.
[Amit Varma]: It also makes it easy to manage a large number of PCs across business locations remotely.
[Amit Varma]: Intel's vPro platform enables IT professionals to discover, repair, protect and even turbocharge networked systems.
[Amit Varma]: It is an unseen force behind the fact that all this technology around us keeps working smoothly.
[Amit Varma]: Intel's vPro platform is built for business, wherever business happens.
[Amit Varma]: Saira, welcome to the Scene in the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. I'm so pleased to be here, and so nice to meet you finally in person.
[Amit Varma]: I've kind of been waiting for a long time to record this episode,
[Amit Varma]: but one of the things that I wasn't very happy about while researching for the episode is that
[Amit Varma]: there's so little of your writing actually available in English.
[Amit Varma]: Like I read a couple of great stories by you which we'll talk about,
[Amit Varma]: and also this wonderful essay you wrote for Caravan, which was so rich in impressions and ideas.
[Amit Varma]: But as you came in, you just mentioned that you've also got other essays in the pipeline,
[Amit Varma]: including one that talks about memories and the layers of memories that builds one's life.
[Amit Varma]: And you kindly offered to read it out for us.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to take you up on that offer.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this essay and then go ahead.
[Guest]: Amit, basically it's going to form the preface to my book of autobiographical essays that I'm writing.
[Guest]: The book is almost done. I think maybe one more essay left to write.
[Guest]: And it's basically a family memoir kind of thing, but it's not actually a linear thing.
[Guest]: Like all the essays are separate. They are usually about a place, a house or a person,
[Guest]: various people in my family. So they are all interconnected essays,
[Guest]: but they are not necessarily one continuous narrative like that.
[Guest]: So this piece that I wrote, which is quite a short piece really,
[Guest]: I mean, I intended it as a preface. I'm still not very sure whether I should use it as a preface.
[Guest]: But it's basically about living in a house, which is a family house in Allahabad, in Raman Road.
[Guest]: In it, the house is also a character.
[Guest]: The house is a character in the sense that, I mean, it describes the house, the rooms inside,
[Guest]: and how people lived in it, and my memories of those people who are not there anymore.
[Guest]: So it sort of starts off like that. So that's the beginning of my...
[Guest]: Wonderful. I can't wait to hear it. Let's go.
[Guest]: So should I read it out now?
[Amit Varma]: Please. Absolutely.
[Guest]: Right. So the piece is called Palimpsest.
[Guest]: And well, anyway, I'll just read it out. So I don't have to, I mean,
[Guest]: I'm not going to explain what it is about because the listeners will get the sense of it.
[Guest]: It's called Palimpsest.
[Guest]: There is something melancholy in the act of writing about one's past.
[Guest]: This is especially the case if most of that past has taken place in the same house in which you still live.
[Guest]: It is your family home, the same house where you have always lived, and yet it is different.
[Guest]: There were people who lived here, but many of them are no longer alive.
[Guest]: Absent, they are still palpable.
[Guest]: The air is saturated with their presence, their invisible script written upon each corner of the house.
[Guest]: You pull the door, and with a creaking of springs, it opens.
[Guest]: The rooms are all there. You feel the volume of the space.
[Guest]: You know the pictures that were on the walls, the exact position of the furniture, the objects in the room.
[Guest]: Nothing has changed, but everything feels changed.
[Guest]: You remember the way light fell from the skylights, some of which are now blocked up or have disappeared in changes made to the house.
[Guest]: There are cobwebs hanging from ceilings too high to be cleaned, not that you want to clean them.
[Guest]: There are termites, too, that swarm out of the ground and make mud tubes, reaching the most unlikely of places.
[Guest]: You can, if you listen hard, hear the quiet clicking sounds they make as they move and munch away at the woodwork, hidden from sight.
[Guest]: You want to disturb nothing. Each space in the house has a history, and it's as if everything in it casts a shadow, has a sort of ghost life.
[Guest]: You try to catch the shadows, to pin them down, but it is not easy.
[Guest]: The harder you try, the more elusive becomes the business of shadows, and you come away with nothing.
[Guest]: You become obsessed with mirrors. Some mirrors are blind and reveal nothing.
[Guest]: There are others in which you look and find in your face your mother or your grandmother.
[Guest]: You see resemblances and patterns you had not noticed before.
[Guest]: You hold up your hand to the mirror and look at the blue veins on your hands that taper into the fingers with their neatly paired nails.
[Guest]: The prominent, busy lines intersect and connect with the lesser ones,
[Guest]: like so many rivers meeting with their tributaries on the triangular delta of your hand.
[Guest]: With a start you realise that it is your mother's hand you are looking at.
[Guest]: It is then that you know that you cannot ever be separated from your history.
[Guest]: Your past is embedded in your body, but sometimes mirrors are false, distorted, damaged or askew.
[Guest]: These are the abstract mirrors, mirrors that you have imagined into being and that can play a trick on you.
[Guest]: There is a patch of black chillies in the garden, black leaves, deep mauve flowers and the little chillies like black tongues.
[Guest]: They look mysterious with a hint of virulence about them.
[Guest]: Watch out for those black tongues, they can put a hex on you.
[Guest]: The black tongues curse and the curse comes true.
[Guest]: You think of the chillies when you look at a photograph taken on Nowruz in the year 1971.
[Guest]: White was the colour for that year, it was the year of peace.
[Guest]: Everyone in the photo is dressed in white and all the food on the dastarkhan is also white.
[Guest]: You look at the faces in the photo and realise that all of those 12 people except for you and your sister are dead.
[Guest]: There is nothing strange about that, everyone dies.
[Guest]: This is no narrative of loss.
[Guest]: Dying is merely a function of living.
[Guest]: But then you see your mother, she is wearing a white saree printed with a paisley pattern in green.
[Guest]: Short-sighted, she always wears glasses and these particular ones have an onion pink frame.
[Guest]: The family has gathered round the teapot in the front veranda of the house.
[Guest]: Uncharacteristically, she does not participate at all in the conversation while a mysterious smile plays on her lips.
[Guest]: Quite suddenly, with an absolutely impassive face, she winks.
[Guest]: Only then do you see that the lens from that side of her spectacles is missing.
[Guest]: It is a comic moment and everyone laughs but it also brings home to you that there is much that you do not see.
[Guest]: Your father comes to you when you are not thinking about him.
[Guest]: He is laughing, he does not speak but he laughs.
[Guest]: His laughter is loud and resonant and the whole room rings with it.
[Guest]: It flows down the stairs in a stream of gushing sound and it gathers in a pool at the bottom of the steps.
[Guest]: It rests on the laburnum that is in full bloom, startling into flight a flock of roosting sparrows.
[Guest]: His body shakes, his eyes fill with tears.
[Guest]: It is not clear whether the laughter is happy or despairing.
[Guest]: One day you enter a room and you find your brother sitting there.
[Guest]: He leans back and closes his eyes, as he does when he does not want to listen to what is being said.
[Guest]: His wife is speaking.
[Guest]: She is always speaking.
[Guest]: A complicated web of lies floats just beneath her skin.
[Guest]: For 26 years he has tried to get to the meaning of what she says.
[Guest]: But the truth can just be glimpsed in flashes, for it can be found only in what she has not said.
[Guest]: None of this happens of course.
[Guest]: It cannot, because none of these people are here any longer.
[Guest]: It's the mirror again, your personal mirror that keeps reflecting the past moments of which your life is composed.
[Guest]: It invents some of those moments too and you can never be sure if something really happened.
[Guest]: The strange thing about living in the same house all your life is that you cannot go back to it,
[Guest]: because for you are still in it, and yet you keep going back.
[Guest]: It is not the house that you are returning to, but a time.
[Guest]: The house merely holds the accumulations of the years,
[Guest]: evidence to the many layers of living in it that are transposed one upon another.
[Guest]: You turn the things of the house over in your hands, curious objects,
[Guest]: threadbare fabric, rusty biscuit tins holding loose clattering buttons of all description,
[Guest]: old watches that stopped long ago, opaque lamp chimneys, issues of Lilliput magazine yellowed with age,
[Guest]: and you don't want to let go of anything.
[Guest]: For those things, unbeknownst to you, have become part of who you are.
[Guest]: Sitting on the terrace, you look about you.
[Guest]: The Algeria nervosa has spread its abundant foliage all over one side of the house.
[Guest]: It's the elephant creeper. It grows rapidly,
[Guest]: so quickly in fact that you feel it has grown another tendril or two in the moment that you looked away.
[Guest]: You wonder if its roots go as deep into the earth as the plant does into the air.
[Guest]: It has the house, and you, firmly in its grip.
[Guest]: You shake yourself and try to leave.
[Guest]: You've been trying to leave for years, fearing that in this stationary town with its two rivers and its narrow roads,
[Guest]: you will become a pumpkin or a gourd.
[Guest]: You look at other houses in other cities.
[Guest]: Other lives flash across your mind.
[Guest]: Hypothetical lives lived hypothetically.
[Guest]: For you know that you will never go away.
[Guest]: The house will never let you go.
[Amit Varma]: That's so beautiful and very moving and I love that image of a pumpkin or a gourd in this small town.
[Amit Varma]: This reminded me of a poem by Constantine Cavafy called The City. Have you read that?
[Amit Varma]: Oh yes, I love that poem. It's one of my favorites.
[Guest]: Let me read it out for my listeners.
[Guest]: Yes, please.
[Amit Varma]: This was so reminiscent of that.
[Amit Varma]: The City by C.P. Cavafy.
[Amit Varma]: You said, I'll go to another country, go to another shore, find another city better than this one.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever I do is fated to turn out wrong and my heart lies buried like something dead.
[Amit Varma]: How long can I let my mind moulder in this place?
[Amit Varma]: Wherever I turn, wherever I look, I see the black ruins of my life here
[Amit Varma]: where I've spent so many years, wasted them, destroyed them totally.
[Amit Varma]: And now there's a stop quote within the poem and the narrator continues.
[Amit Varma]: You won't find a new country, won't find another shore.
[Amit Varma]: This city will always pursue you.
[Amit Varma]: You'll walk the same streets, grow old in the same neighborhoods,
[Amit Varma]: turn grey in these same houses.
[Amit Varma]: You'll always end up in this city.
[Amit Varma]: Don't hope for things elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: There's no ship for you, there's no road.
[Amit Varma]: Now that you wasted your life here in this small corner,
[Amit Varma]: you've destroyed it everywhere in the world.
[Amit Varma]: Beautiful.
[Guest]: It's such a lovely poem.
[Guest]: It's a very nice poem.
[Guest]: I love that.
[Guest]: I mean, Cavafy is also one of my favorite poets.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Out of the other poems, I like this one too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I kind of love this one the most actually out of all his work
[Guest]: because it speaks so much to me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one of the things that I think all our listeners would have noticed
[Amit Varma]: while you read that passage out and that I constantly kept noticing
[Amit Varma]: when I read all your essays and your stories,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll come back to that, you know, as we reach those particular pieces,
[Amit Varma]: is your power of observation.
[Amit Varma]: Like all these little details that you're coming out with.
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing I tell my writing students all the time is avoid the abstract.
[Amit Varma]: Go for the concrete.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot of richness there.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I'm kind of curious about is this power of observation
[Amit Varma]: something that was always part of you
[Amit Varma]: or is it something that you felt the need to cultivate as a writer
[Amit Varma]: because another sort of journey you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: is of being a young writer.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, you've spoken of the bungalows of Allahabad
[Amit Varma]: and how they were also far away from each other
[Amit Varma]: and you were like an island and you had no sense of that larger society around you.
[Amit Varma]: So you were like a writer without material.
[Amit Varma]: You knew there was a writer inside you, but you had no material,
[Amit Varma]: which is how when I look back on my 20s,
[Amit Varma]: it was kind of exactly like that, that you want to write,
[Amit Varma]: but you haven't lived enough to write.
[Amit Varma]: So this acute power of observation,
[Amit Varma]: has it always been there even before you had this consciousness
[Amit Varma]: of wanting to write?
[Guest]: Amit, I think the power of observation also comes from dullness.
[Guest]: I know it sounds like the complete opposite of what we are trying to get at,
[Guest]: but it's the dull day on which nothing is happening.
[Guest]: You are there quietly by yourself and you're looking around,
[Guest]: you're looking at things.
[Guest]: So you tend to notice much more because your mind is not distracted
[Guest]: and I mean what you said about the bungalows and how I lived,
[Guest]: I mean I spent my early years and I still do in fact live in the same bungalow,
[Guest]: though the city itself has changed quite a lot.
[Guest]: But my early years were very quiet years in the sense that nothing was happening.
[Guest]: These bungalows, Allahabad is a city of bungalows
[Guest]: that had been built by the Brits long ago
[Guest]: and many of those bungalows have now gone.
[Guest]: They've been demolished, but ours is one of the few bungalows that remains.
[Guest]: So my life in those bungalows was one of solitude.
[Guest]: I would say even as a child, I mean there were not many people to be met
[Guest]: and neighbours were far away and we were not really particularly interacting with the neighbours.
[Guest]: So it was a lot of space around you and you could sort of wander about in that space,
[Guest]: climb trees, I even chewed leaves to find out if they're poisonous.
[Guest]: Were they? Obviously not.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I survived that.
[Guest]: But I mean there were all these experiments that could be done
[Guest]: and you could just observe nature and observe.
[Guest]: I mean it became like examining everything under a microscope really
[Guest]: because I mean nothing else was going on to take your attention.
[Guest]: There were birds, bird calls, all these things you were noticing.
[Guest]: So it was in a sense an idyllic life, but of course it was far away from other people.
[Guest]: So while writing stories, one also has to know those people
[Guest]: and in India that already comes with a challenge
[Guest]: because all the names for instance of people, they come with their background.
[Guest]: You know, Mr. Jhunjhunwala or Mr. Gupta or Mr. Srivastava, Mrs. Dhondi or whatever,
[Guest]: you know, these people all have different sets of geographical and also cultural sort of features.
[Guest]: So you already don't have that, which was what I found difficult in the beginning
[Guest]: when I started to write that living in a bungalow like this,
[Guest]: basically you don't really, I mean there's the linguistic aspect also of it,
[Guest]: which is that in the kind of house that I grew up,
[Guest]: there were many books and books in several languages
[Guest]: and the languages that I heard around me like we spoke Hindustani at home,
[Guest]: in school it was English and we were supposed to be fined if we spoke in Hindi.
[Guest]: So that never really happened.
[Guest]: I mean we were not fined and people spoke in Hindi all the time,
[Guest]: but that was the thing that they did not encourage speaking in Hindi in school
[Guest]: and at home we were embarrassed to speak in English
[Guest]: because our family had a sort of linguistic pride.
[Guest]: I did not sort of, nobody, none of us spoke in English at home
[Guest]: and then there was the Avadhi that was spoken around us like people,
[Guest]: the servants for instance, they spoke Avadhi and other people around
[Guest]: who had a rural background, they were speaking in Avadhi.
[Guest]: My grandmother spoke Bhojpuri because I mean she came from,
[Guest]: I mean from that side, further east UP,
[Guest]: Banaras was mine, I mean Lamahi, actually that's a village called Lamahi
[Guest]: which is about three miles away from Banaras and there's Bhojpuri spoken over there.
[Guest]: So she would speak Bhojpuri and Bangla, my father was a fluent Bangla speaker
[Guest]: and well he spoke Bangla quite obviously.
[Guest]: If he found out that you knew Bangla, he would always prefer to speak in Bangla
[Guest]: and not in Hindi or Bhojpuri, but he spoke to his mother in Bhojpuri.
[Guest]: So there was all these sort of sounds sort of falling,
[Guest]: kind of multilingual sort of thing that was constantly
[Guest]: and that's not my situation particularly in India
[Guest]: because there are many people who would have a similar experience
[Guest]: of many languages being spoken around them.
[Guest]: So there was this thing of which language to write in.
[Guest]: When I started out writing, I mean I wondered because English,
[Guest]: I was quite fluent with English, my reading was in English,
[Guest]: in school we were taught to write in English.
[Guest]: So it seemed that perhaps one should write in English,
[Guest]: but then while speaking I was more comfortable with Hindustani.
[Guest]: So there was this whole struggle going on,
[Guest]: groping for language as it were, which language to write in
[Guest]: and this sort of lack of a language and then the lack of material
[Guest]: because I didn't really know anyone around.
[Guest]: So all these kind of added up to a sort of angst about writing,
[Guest]: which I was not able to overcome for a very long time
[Guest]: and this flight of writing from writing fiction
[Guest]: pursued me for a long time, long long time.
[Guest]: And I think finally in my 40s I started writing something like that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll take your point about dullness being a factor for noticing,
[Amit Varma]: but the point is generations of people went through the similar dullness
[Amit Varma]: and didn't emerge with, didn't have those powers of observation frankly.
[Amit Varma]: I mean I kind of didn't, I mean that is if there is one thing that I think I lacked,
[Amit Varma]: it was this looking at everything with that acute glance.
[Amit Varma]: Very often I've kind of eaten a meal and you could ask me later
[Amit Varma]: what did it taste like and I wouldn't have noticed
[Unknown]: because that mindfulness is just not there.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of threads to pick up on, but when you spoke about languages,
[Amit Varma]: like elsewhere you've spoken about how your mother Zerahera
[Amit Varma]: and her sister Mogul Mosud, you know they used to write in Urdu
[Amit Varma]: and then they used to publish it in Hindi because you know easier to get published that way
[Amit Varma]: and they would tell each other stories and they would add a first sound, F sound
[Unknown]: so that other people couldn't make out what they were saying
[Unknown]: because this one consonant would be really prominent and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And I imagine that that would lead to a heightened mindfulness of language itself.
[Amit Varma]: Like what is it doing, you know what, how are the different sounds interacting,
[Amit Varma]: how does something sound, how different kind of words come together.
[Amit Varma]: Like the exact same example that I mentioned about food could be a very bad habit for a writer.
[Unknown]: If you're not mindful of language at all,
[Amit Varma]: and of course most of the writing one does is kind of an autopilot,
[Amit Varma]: but you arrive at that autopilot and you build that reflexive style by first being mindful.
[Unknown]: So was there a sense when you were kind of growing up,
[Amit Varma]: was there a sense where language was important,
[Amit Varma]: were you thinking of language differently from say,
[Amit Varma]: you know the people you went to school with at St. Mary's or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: was there that kind of close attention to what words are being used,
[Amit Varma]: how a story is being constructed and so on?
[Guest]: Well actually in my family, language was one thing that was constantly spoken about.
[Guest]: I mean people, if there was some word for instance that appeared that you did not know,
[Guest]: immediately a dictionary would be fished out and the word would be made clear.
[Guest]: And also sometimes going to the root of that word,
[Guest]: whether it was coming from Arabic or Persian or whatever,
[Guest]: you know depends which language the word belonged to.
[Guest]: So there was this very heightened consciousness of language in my family
[Guest]: and as you said, I mean my mother and my aunt both wrote their stories first in Urdu,
[Guest]: which was their primary language.
[Guest]: And then because of ease of publication and just wider reach of publication,
[Guest]: they switched and they wrote their scripts out again in Hindi.
[Guest]: And they were constantly, I mean their early education, they did not go to school.
[Guest]: The Maulvi used to come at home to teach them.
[Guest]: And of course they had many tales about how they used to give the Maulvi the slip.
[Guest]: Like he would come and Maulvi Sahab was very fond of his opium.
[Guest]: So he'd come and he'd sit down and he'd set them the work for that day
[Guest]: and he'd put on, have his opium and then he'd fall into a deep sleep.
[Guest]: So these kids, I mean they were really wicked kids I think.
[Guest]: I mean they were sort of, they were pretending to sort of move backward and forward
[Guest]: learning their Farsi and learning their poetry and all that.
[Guest]: And then they would go to the kitchen and pick up this huge tin thali from there
[Guest]: and bang on it with a huge stone.
[Guest]: So this sounded like the bell that came from the town hall at 12 o'clock or whatever
[Guest]: and they'd sort of, Maulvi Sahab would wake up suddenly and say,
[Guest]: oh what was that? Is it time?
[Guest]: As the gajar baj gaya, gajar bajta tha.
[Guest]: So gajar baj gaya meant that his lesson was over.
[Guest]: So haan haan Maulvi Sahab, humlo toh ek ghante se padh rahe hain.
[Guest]: And then he'd shuffle off and the lesson would be over
[Guest]: and then they'd be free to do all their little pranks all over the place.
[Guest]: So I mean, so they never really had a formal education in that sense
[Guest]: but even so they were really well versed in their Farsi
[Guest]: and they would do and they knew all these couplets
[Guest]: and for every occasion they'd come up with a suitable couplet.
[Guest]: So all this whole thing of many languages was already there at home.
[Guest]: You know, one could hear this and these languages sort of went into
[Guest]: a sleeping pool of languages, I would say, inside me
[Guest]: which never emerged at that point.
[Guest]: But there's this whole mysterious thing about writing
[Guest]: that when you sit down to write, it's like one word follows another
[Guest]: and somehow what emerges is what you may have felt say 40 years ago
[Guest]: and you don't know which bird it was singing in the pine tree
[Guest]: on which particular Sunday or which line someone said
[Guest]: that is suddenly going to surface when you're writing
[Guest]: and you will not be able to think of that when you're actually not writing.
[Guest]: So it's a very mysterious and a very magical process.
[Guest]: So language too is part of that.
[Guest]: You know, the words for these things come when you're actually writing them
[Guest]: and they are somewhere in your submerged memory
[Guest]: and you don't remember them.
[Guest]: If you consciously try to remember them, they will not come out.
[Guest]: So that's how languages have worked for me.
[Guest]: You know, it's something, it's more a process of absorption.
[Guest]: You know, it's just something that is going inside you
[Guest]: and is waiting for that time.
[Guest]: So, I mean, when you put it down on paper,
[Guest]: it's just something just, it's like when you put this lemon juice on,
[Guest]: you know, if you write something with lemon juice and you iron it,
[Guest]: then the writing appears, otherwise it's invisible.
[Guest]: So it's a bit like that, you know.
[Guest]: So these things are already within you
[Guest]: and when you write, they just, you recognize them rather than remember them.
[Amit Varma]: That's beautiful. So the writing is already there
[Unknown]: and the process of writing is like the act of ironing.
[Unknown]: Yes, yes, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also fascinated by a sort of another thread
[Amit Varma]: that came up when you were reading that piece
[Amit Varma]: that comes up now, that comes up in your other work,
[Amit Varma]: which is sort of the thread of memory.
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra
[Amit Varma]: who had done a very fine book on partition.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just looking at the objects people carried with them
[Amit Varma]: during partition and the memories that they carried.
[Amit Varma]: And like while researching for that,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I realized was that how memory works in the brain
[Amit Varma]: is that when you remember something, you're remembering what happened.
[Amit Varma]: But every subsequent time you're remembering the last remembering of it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, over a period of time,
[Amit Varma]: your memories can grow richer or can fade
[Amit Varma]: or can have other layers painted onto them by whatever,
[Amit Varma]: which is why, you know, sometimes if you shared a memory
[Amit Varma]: with someone 20 years ago and you both discuss it,
[Amit Varma]: you might find that both of you remember it completely differently.
[Unknown]: While one would assume the instant after it happened,
[Amit Varma]: it would have been the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: But over time, it's kind of changed.
[Amit Varma]: And what I find in your essays and so on
[Amit Varma]: is that there is a lot of very deep remembering.
[Amit Varma]: And I say deep remembering, not just in a sense of events,
[Amit Varma]: but also all these impressionistic details
[Amit Varma]: that are kind of all over the place.
[Amit Varma]: I saw my father struggle with Parkinson's before he passed away.
[Amit Varma]: And his memory was kind of going before that for a few years.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that, one of the common phenomena
[Amit Varma]: in people whose memory goes in old age and which I saw in my father
[Amit Varma]: was that the edges remain very stark.
[Amit Varma]: So you remember what happened yesterday
[Amit Varma]: and you remember what happened when you were 10
[Amit Varma]: and it's those middle periods which kind of tend to go.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember once he asked me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what were you like growing up? Because I don't remember.
[Amit Varma]: I think about that because when I look back
[Amit Varma]: on my own process of remembering things,
[Amit Varma]: you know, some people that never had meaning
[Amit Varma]: suddenly have meaning because of the way I have changed
[Amit Varma]: or just the nature of memory changes and one forgets so much.
[Amit Varma]: So since you have both been someone who is playing around a lot
[Amit Varma]: in that pool of memories, both in your writing
[Amit Varma]: and I'm sure in these autobiographical essays as well,
[Amit Varma]: which I can't wait to read.
[Amit Varma]: And as someone who is deeply self-reflective,
[Amit Varma]: what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there a sense in which your life at 10
[Amit Varma]: is being more richly lived now than it was when you were 10?
[Guest]: I think that is true because actually I have always thought,
[Guest]: in fact, I wrote about this in my novel also,
[Guest]: that the past actually never dies.
[Guest]: The past becomes present for you when you remember it.
[Guest]: So in a sense, there is no past.
[Guest]: I mean, everything, at the moment of remembering,
[Guest]: you are living it, right? I mean, sort of, it's just there for you.
[Guest]: So, and also memory is changing.
[Guest]: You said that you may remember something
[Guest]: and last time it was completely different.
[Guest]: I think that's what fiction is all about.
[Guest]: Perhaps life is a fiction, you know,
[Guest]: because you live things and later you remember them.
[Guest]: It's something else you remember
[Guest]: and when you're writing about it, some other thing happens.
[Guest]: You know, so it's all part of this whole mysterious universe of words
[Guest]: and memories and how words recall those memories,
[Guest]: which keeps changing.
[Guest]: And if two people have, say, been through some incident together,
[Guest]: their remembering of it can be completely different.
[Guest]: We just don't know.
[Guest]: It's also the individual perception of things that comes into play
[Guest]: and some person may remember a certain thing about that day,
[Guest]: the other person may remember something else.
[Guest]: So it just becomes like that, different memories.
[Guest]: So it sees various layers and various sort of submersions,
[Guest]: I would say, and things that you come up with
[Guest]: that just add to the whole persona of the writer, I think.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just, people do a lot of detective work.
[Guest]: For instance, when you're writing something, you publish a story.
[Guest]: So people go, oh, this is about this one.
[Guest]: You know, people say, and it's a very irritating question for any writer
[Guest]: because when I'm writing, for instance,
[Guest]: the story has to be grounded somewhere.
[Guest]: You can't base it in some fictional place.
[Guest]: It has to be a place that you know and you can write the details of.
[Guest]: But the story itself, when it's put into that background,
[Guest]: into that ground, rather, is a fictional story.
[Guest]: So, I mean, it's not about so-and-so or, you know,
[Guest]: people always try to find parallels,
[Guest]: especially people who know you try to find parallels in your stories.
[Guest]: But I think that is a completely sort of
[Guest]: not a good way of looking at sort of writing like that.
[Guest]: But I think we live our lives largely as fiction, you know,
[Guest]: and the memories that get created are also fiction from that point of view.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, fascinating to think of it like that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about your childhood because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, got this collection of your grandfather Munshi Premchand's
[Amit Varma]: collected stories, which had an introduction by you.
[Amit Varma]: And in that introduction, you wrote, and I'll read this bit out.
[Amit Varma]: A mention of Babuji would crop up in conversation,
[Amit Varma]: the simplicity with which he chose to live his life,
[Amit Varma]: his idealism and high moral standards,
[Amit Varma]: his loud and infectious laughter,
[Amit Varma]: his writing at odd hours of the night, early in the morning,
[Amit Varma]: often by light of a hurricane lamp,
[Amit Varma]: his commitment to the oppressed and downtrodden,
[Amit Varma]: his belief that money corrupts.
[Amit Varma]: The notion that being poor is somehow spiritually exalting,
[Amit Varma]: a little hypocritically permeated the atmosphere in our well-to-do home,
[Amit Varma]: so much so that as a child, when asked once what I'd like to be when I grew up,
[Amit Varma]: I answered that I'd like to be poor.
[Amit Varma]: His inability to clear a qualifying entrance exam for college
[Amit Varma]: because his maths was weak,
[Amit Varma]: the particular vegetables he'd been advised not to eat
[Amit Varma]: because of his poor digestion,
[Amit Varma]: talk about him was frequent and he was never far from us,
[Amit Varma]: hovering benignly in our consciousness,
[Amit Varma]: a somewhat larger-than-life figure in the family cupboard
[Amit Varma]: to be thought of with pride, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: How was it like growing up in Premchand's household,
[Amit Varma]: whose outside the household, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is a legend and much loved by people in a very visceral way,
[Amit Varma]: as you go on to describe later in the essay,
[Amit Varma]: but at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: like your answer about how I'd like to be poor when I grow up,
[Amit Varma]: I guess, did that aura of Premchand,
[Amit Varma]: and also your family was very literary,
[Amit Varma]: both your parents were artists and they were accomplished,
[Amit Varma]: in fact, your grandmother herself was a very formidable person
[Amit Varma]: and I'll ask you more about her later,
[Amit Varma]: but growing up then, as you did,
[Amit Varma]: what was that like?
[Amit Varma]: Did it set you apart from everyone else?
[Amit Varma]: Did you have this sort of feeling that I have to live up to this?
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier you mentioned you were scared to speak English at home
[Amit Varma]: because, hey, you know, the greatest Hindi writer is home.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how that played out.
[Guest]: It was actually a fear of standing apart, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: because in school, I mean, in the Hindi book,
[Guest]: obviously, I mean, every year we would have a Premchand story
[Guest]: in the book that we were taught
[Guest]: and I would sort of think of it with dread,
[Guest]: the day when that story would be read,
[Guest]: because the teacher would point me out at once.
[Guest]: Oh, that's her grandfather who wrote this
[Guest]: and everyone would turn around to look at me.
[Guest]: So it was a moment of pride for me,
[Guest]: but it was also a moment of dread.
[Guest]: I was a very shy child, I was a pathologically shy child
[Guest]: and then to have everyone notice you
[Guest]: and, you know, maybe talk about you, think about you.
[Guest]: So all that somehow made you stand apart
[Guest]: and it was not something that I quite enjoyed.
[Guest]: Inside, I was very pleased that, look, my grandfather was so great
[Guest]: that everyone knows about him and all that.
[Guest]: But it was his very largeness,
[Guest]: the very, you know, his greatness outside the home
[Guest]: that made him somehow out of reach for me.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, I read the stories.
[Guest]: Firstly, we all went to an English medium school.
[Guest]: So Hindi was not a language
[Guest]: that one was reading on a regular basis.
[Guest]: Of course, one read the textbook and all that,
[Guest]: but I actually came to reading Hindi much later.
[Guest]: I've also discussed this in that essay that I wrote,
[Guest]: when my father was choosing stories for Kahani
[Guest]: and all these whole bunch of stories would come
[Guest]: and, you know, there were too many.
[Guest]: So he'd asked me also to sift through some of them.
[Guest]: So then I started reading Hindi.
[Guest]: But Hindi literature as such, as far as Premchand went,
[Guest]: I had not really read very much Premchand when I was a child.
[Guest]: And also there was this feeling somehow that
[Guest]: I'm related to him, you somehow have inhaled his writing
[Guest]: without having read it.
[Guest]: You know, this very peculiar feeling.
[Guest]: So that was there too.
[Guest]: And then slowly, of course,
[Guest]: one became aware of the writing
[Guest]: and I read it much later in my college years
[Guest]: and when this Kahani thing happened
[Guest]: and one was reading more comfortably in Hindi,
[Guest]: I actually tutored myself to read in Hindi
[Guest]: and to write in Hindi because,
[Guest]: when people used to ask me,
[Guest]: even when my collection of Hindi stories had been published,
[Guest]: that did you write them in Roman?
[Guest]: How did you write them in Hindi?
[Guest]: It was always this linguistic kind of migration
[Guest]: that was happening all the time in me.
[Guest]: I was thinking in Hindi or sometimes in English sometimes
[Guest]: and the reading and the writing were crossing
[Guest]: and the whole process of translation, for instance,
[Guest]: also began as a sort of groping for language
[Guest]: and which language is as to find
[Guest]: which language was I was the most comfortable in.
[Guest]: And that process has never really changed.
[Guest]: It's still the same, you know, I still fumble.
[Guest]: I still fumble.
[Guest]: I think maybe this will be better in English,
[Guest]: that this will be better in Hindi.
[Guest]: The knowledge of Urdu also complicated it a little bit
[Guest]: because then there's Urdu also to be reckoned with, you know.
[Guest]: So, I mean, it's all these,
[Guest]: but I don't think of them as a disadvantage.
[Guest]: Rather, they contributed to a kind of richness of voice.
[Guest]: I think if you know other languages,
[Guest]: they are always pushing up between,
[Guest]: beneath the language that you're writing in.
[Guest]: So, you get a sense of a larger sort of linguistic culture
[Guest]: when you're writing, say, in Hindi, for instance.
[Guest]: I like to write in Hindi because
[Guest]: things around me are happening in Hindi, you know.
[Guest]: I mean, everything that's taking place is happening in Hindi
[Guest]: and Hindi also has the advantage
[Guest]: that you can lace it with things from other languages
[Guest]: like registers are important.
[Guest]: For instance, if there's someone who's swearing
[Guest]: or some vendors calling out,
[Guest]: you know, jamun, kali hai, dilwali hai,
[Guest]: you know, little phrases like that
[Guest]: which are impossible to translate in English.
[Guest]: And English already has a sort of middle-class feel to it.
[Guest]: I mean, it seems to me that middle-class homes,
[Guest]: only people in middle-class homes mostly know English.
[Guest]: And that is the world that they know.
[Guest]: So, when you write about a person walking on the street,
[Guest]: you can't do street speak in English
[Guest]: because the speech is actually much more colourful
[Guest]: in the colloquial language.
[Guest]: So, English has that disadvantage.
[Guest]: I mean, it has sort of,
[Guest]: the reach is not as great as the regional languages, I think.
[Guest]: So, I mean, it's a whole world that is closed
[Guest]: in a sense to the writer in English, I feel.
[Guest]: I mean, of course, people are writing, but somehow,
[Guest]: I mean, I feel that the languages can get that much better.
[Guest]: Hindi, for instance, which is why I decided.
[Guest]: And my father, of course, wanted me to write in Hindi.
[Guest]: So, that was also one reason why I started writing,
[Guest]: started thinking about writing in Hindi.
[Guest]: But there was this whole lot of other reasons too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think you mentioned in your essay
[Amit Varma]: that your father had this belief that whatever is the language of your birth,
[Unknown]: your mother tongue, you must write in it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Premchand once said that he wrote Hindi in the morning,
[Amit Varma]: Urdu in the afternoon, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And he also used to take notes for his stories in English
[Amit Varma]: because it just seemed to lend itself to that,
[Unknown]: the kind of economy of the language,
[Amit Varma]: the precision of the language and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it just strikes me, as someone who's only really good at one of these languages,
[Amit Varma]: the other languages I understand, I speak,
[Amit Varma]: but English is the only one I've really thought deeply about and written in.
[Amit Varma]: And it just strikes me that they're all fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: so different from each other that
[Amit Varma]: there are things you can express in one
[Amit Varma]: that you just cannot express in the other, for example.
[Amit Varma]: So, is it then the case that the language that you then
[Amit Varma]: choose to use at a particular moment is what is appropriate for that task?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I imagine if you were writing, say, a business-like email to your bank,
[Amit Varma]: you would, of course, do it in English
[Amit Varma]: because you're just putting down a bunch of points.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to capture the ambience around your local paanwala,
[Amit Varma]: you cannot capture that in English.
[Amit Varma]: You have to do that in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: I just find that, you know, being multilingual myself,
[Amit Varma]: at least at a sense of speaking these languages,
[Amit Varma]: I feel that I'm more fortunate than people in the West
[Amit Varma]: who might only know one language
[Amit Varma]: because it's kind of richer this way.
[Amit Varma]: So, is that something you feel at all?
[Amit Varma]: And has there been like a process where you've come to peace
[Amit Varma]: with knowing that you have all these languages
[Amit Varma]: with all their different flavours for all their different uses
[Amit Varma]: and not have to think about, this is my language?
[Guest]: I don't know if the question of which one is mine comes into it
[Guest]: because, I mean, these are all the languages that compose
[Guest]: the universe that is around me, you know.
[Guest]: And even if I'm, for instance, translating,
[Guest]: the language that I choose to translate in will also,
[Guest]: even if it's English, it will have different registers
[Guest]: from what I have absorbed from my surroundings.
[Guest]: So, all these languages compose the environment where I come from.
[Guest]: So, I don't really sort of think of it as this one is mine
[Guest]: and this one is not, you know.
[Guest]: It's just something that you have grown up with
[Guest]: and something that has become part of you.
[Guest]: So, all these languages are part of me.
[Guest]: English is something that I have read a lot in.
[Guest]: Most of my reading, in fact, has been in English.
[Guest]: This has also been an advantage in the sense that
[Guest]: it has shaped my sensibility in a certain way.
[Guest]: And when you read something and it also kind of
[Guest]: hones a kind of critical register in you.
[Guest]: So, when you read something else, for instance, in Hindi
[Guest]: and you know the horizons that are there in Western literature,
[Guest]: which is, you know, many other languages,
[Guest]: which, of course, we get those in translation,
[Guest]: but even in translation, I mean, you can get a sense
[Guest]: of all these other worlds that exist outside India.
[Guest]: And you sort of use that lens to look at what is around you,
[Guest]: what you are reading, even in the languages what you are reading.
[Guest]: So, you get a kind of critical faculty
[Guest]: and your sensibility has got shaped by the reading.
[Guest]: So, reading has been very important for me.
[Guest]: I mean, reading has been one of the primary things
[Guest]: that I have done. I mean, I've been more of a reader
[Guest]: rather than a writer, I would say, because, I mean,
[Guest]: I've been reading from the age of, what, five or whatever it is.
[Guest]: I'm very young age and, you know, you sort of go through
[Guest]: all these authors and you sort of pick up something.
[Guest]: And, like, when I was eight years old,
[Guest]: I think I wrote my first story in English,
[Guest]: which was modelled on the Enid Blyton stories
[Guest]: that I would read and it was picked up.
[Guest]: I mean, Arvind Mehrotra and my cousins Alok and Amit,
[Guest]: who died later, they were bringing out this magazine called Damn You.
[Guest]: It was on the pattern of the New York little magazine called Fuck You.
[Guest]: So, they named it Damn You.
[Guest]: And they were all a bunch of teenagers themselves then.
[Guest]: They were in University, Allahabad University,
[Guest]: and they decided to sort of bring out this cyclostyle magazine.
[Guest]: So, they used it in that because they were running out of material.
[Guest]: Who's going to give the material to these bunch of teenagers?
[Guest]: So, anyways, they were looking for material at that point.
[Guest]: Of course, it became very famous later
[Guest]: and now it's become part of this world sort of magazine thing, you know.
[Guest]: But at that point, so my story,
[Guest]: the early story in English was published in that, Damn You.
[Guest]: So, my journey, in a sense, started with English.
[Guest]: But then, of course, as it went along,
[Guest]: there was a huge gap in my writing.
[Guest]: It started at that age, but then I wasn't writing very much for many years.
[Guest]: And for all these reasons that I was groping for a language
[Guest]: and just thinking and agonising about how I was not being able to write
[Guest]: and looking at the shape of my hands, for instance,
[Guest]: or looking into my eyes in the mirror and thinking,
[Guest]: oh, this looks like a writer, but I could not somehow,
[Guest]: the writer and I could never meet.
[Guest]: You know, it was like having a star-crossed lover.
[Guest]: You know, you couldn't meet the writer and I were just, you know, away from each other.
[Guest]: So, anyway, so and in that time I came to this,
[Guest]: there was this, there's this word Shabd,
[Guest]: which in Hindi means sound and it also means word.
[Guest]: So, this somehow created this bridge for me.
[Guest]: It was, it came to my, I mean, I thought about it in that way that it's a bridge
[Guest]: between the heard and the written, you know,
[Guest]: because it's a sound also and Shabd is a word also.
[Guest]: So, it's the written word.
[Guest]: So, that somehow seemed very important to me at that point.
[Guest]: It became like, it created a kind of bridge between the heard and the written literature.
[Guest]: I mean, there was this language of sound, I thought, which had no meaning behind it.
[Guest]: For instance, the whistle of an engine or the sound, the chak-chak sound of the pump.
[Guest]: I heard it in the village where I went once,
[Guest]: or the sound of the bullock cart wheels grinding away on the road.
[Guest]: These are all sounds and it's a kind of language of sound,
[Guest]: but it leads to nothing else, but the language of words leads somewhere else.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I don't know how, but it created this thing that there's something,
[Guest]: the writing can be auditory as well as, you know, something that is written down.
[Guest]: So, that was an important moment for me and gradually all these sort of,
[Guest]: all this thinking about language finally led to my first story.
[Guest]: I think I was, must have been in my early 40s, something like that,
[Guest]: when I wrote the first story, which was in Hindi.
[Guest]: So, that's how my writing career started and I started quite late.
[Guest]: I'm a slow writer also, so, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So, I have like three or four questions arising from here and one of them is this,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, you've spoken about how a lot of your early reading was English
[Amit Varma]: and it blighted and then by the age of 13 you discover Sartre and all the Russians
[Amit Varma]: and Catherine Mansfield and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it strikes me that the different literatures,
[Amit Varma]: different world literatures evolved in different ways
[Amit Varma]: to be something completely different and to have different sets of values, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, David Rubin in The World of Premchand wrote about Premchand himself.
[Amit Varma]: He wrote, quote,
[Amit Varma]: To Premchand belongs a distinction of creating the genre of the serious short story
[Amit Varma]: and the serious novel as well in both Hindi and Urdu.
[Amit Varma]: Virtually single-handed, he lifted fiction in these languages
[Amit Varma]: from a quagmire of aimless romantic chronicles
[Amit Varma]: to a high level of realistic narrative comparable to European fiction of the time.
[Amit Varma]: And in both languages, he has, in addition, remained an unsurpassed master
[Amit Varma]: and elsewhere Sheldon Pollock kind of expressed a view that Premchand believed in social realism
[Amit Varma]: and he kind of looked down on what he called the feminine quality,
[Amit Varma]: the tenderness and emotion of contemporary Bengali literature.
[Amit Varma]: And even at the level at which Premchand was writing that he's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm taking Rubin's words for it because I haven't read enough to come to my own judgment,
[Amit Varma]: but even at the level at which he is writing where he has lifted it to more serious,
[Amit Varma]: it is still very different from the European literature that you read.
[Amit Varma]: Like, when I read your stories, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you're using details and actions a lot.
[Amit Varma]: So it's all show-don't-tell in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if I look at a story like your translation of Premchand's Idgah,
[Amit Varma]: for example, the second last paragraph, when the grandmother realizes what the boy has done,
[Amit Varma]: and it's all tell, Premchand is just describing her emotions and the way she feels.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas a more modern writer, a more Western writer would show her doing something
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, with more economy, just through actions and a detail,
[Amit Varma]: bring out the same emotion in the reader. These are different values at play.
[Amit Varma]: And again, one doesn't want to make a value judgment on these different values.
[Amit Varma]: These are literatures evolving in different kinds of direction.
[Amit Varma]: So then the thing is that as someone whose sensibilities are shaped by Western literature,
[Amit Varma]: by, you know, the precision, the economy, the sort of all the values of Western literature,
[Amit Varma]: would you have to slip into a different mode while reading Hindi and Urdu literature?
[Guest]: As far as Premchand goes, I mean, the reason why he's doing this,
[Amit Varma]: firstly, he's coming from a different time.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, of course.
[Guest]: And secondly, Premchand was in a hurry. I mean, he had a mission.
[Guest]: He is trying to change things. I mean, he has this mission and so very often
[Guest]: he's writing at great speed and he died early and he's written so much.
[Guest]: I don't think anyone in the world have been thinking about it.
[Guest]: I don't think any writer in the world has probably written sort of so much.
[Guest]: I mean, he's written short stories, he's written novels, he's written plays,
[Guest]: he's written letters, he's written essays, he's done translations.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a whole huge range of what he's done, you know.
[Guest]: So it's, I mean, I'm constantly foxed by this.
[Guest]: I mean, how can a man who is in ill health, he has poor health throughout,
[Guest]: he dies at the age of 56, how has he managed to write so much?
[Guest]: And he's like fired with some kind of creative instinct
[Guest]: and he has to change things. He just believes in change
[Guest]: and he just writes and he's seen all these things around him.
[Guest]: So he's writing about the reality which is still pretty relevant actually
[Guest]: because nothing much has changed in the countryside.
[Guest]: So he's writing and he's writing across a whole range of things.
[Guest]: You know, he's also not just a social realist, I think.
[Guest]: There are many stories that are not socially realist stories.
[Guest]: There's one tiny story, I don't know if Arvind and I have translated.
[Guest]: In fact, we've been working on that project too, which is,
[Guest]: we've done about 8 to 10 stories.
[Guest]: We want to do some more and then maybe find a publisher for them.
[Guest]: So in that story, it's called Darwaza in Hindi
[Guest]: and it's about a door and a little child.
[Guest]: This man is sitting with a little child and this child is just looking
[Guest]: and he's chasing a bird, he's doing this, that and the door is open all the while
[Guest]: and the child is not bothered about the door
[Guest]: and then suddenly somebody goes past on the road and he's selling sweetmeats
[Guest]: or something he's selling and the child wants that.
[Guest]: And this father who he's sitting with refuses to buy him that.
[Guest]: So he gets into this temper and he rushes to his mother
[Guest]: but the door which has been open all this while has suddenly banged shut
[Guest]: and the child who so far had not been bothered with the door
[Guest]: is now suddenly very anxious that the door is shut.
[Guest]: So he starts crying and he runs towards the door.
[Guest]: And it's a very tiny story, it's about, I think, two pages or something like that,
[Guest]: a very, very short story.
[Guest]: So it's not about social realism at all.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a very moving, very lovely story
[Guest]: and just a moment, he's caught this moment of this child.
[Guest]: So he's written a whole range of things, many other kinds of things also
[Guest]: and even if he sometimes uses, he uses all sorts of devices to get his point across.
[Guest]: So I don't know whether it would be right to call him primarily, he is primarily a social realist
[Guest]: but there are other examples of stories that are not in that mode.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't mean the example as a criticism of Premchand or anything of the sort
[Amit Varma]: and we'll discuss it more but I was just kind of leading to the question of how
[Amit Varma]: these different kinds of literatures, how does one look at them?
[Amit Varma]: Does one look at them with different lenses?
[Amit Varma]: My next question was also, for example, going to be about languages
[Amit Varma]: which is a related question that languages also seem to have qualities of their own
[Amit Varma]: which lend themselves to a certain kind of expression.
[Amit Varma]: So it's always seemed to me that say Urdu and Bengali are very expressionistic languages
[Amit Varma]: whereas languages like say Japanese and Korean are much more minimalistic
[Amit Varma]: and you see that in the kind of literature that emerges from these languages
[Amit Varma]: and English is in a kind of a middle ground.
[Amit Varma]: So if you just do a direct translation say like a lot of translations of Tagore for example
[Amit Varma]: and I'm half Bengali so I know a bit of Bengali fail completely to me
[Amit Varma]: because they are gorgeous and beautiful in Bengali
[Amit Varma]: but if you just try a literal translation it simply doesn't work
[Amit Varma]: because it just seems too overblown and purple and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So as someone who looks at literature and you know you've presumably
[Amit Varma]: then imbibed all the values of the Western literature that you're reading.
[Amit Varma]: How does one adjust one's lens?
[Amit Varma]: Like of course one adjusts it for context if someone like Premchand is writing in the early 20th century
[Amit Varma]: there's only so much you can expect, only so many influences that he was open to
[Amit Varma]: but apart from that how does one sort of
[Guest]: I think possibly we generalize too much about literatures.
[Guest]: I mean Western literature is also hugely sort of different
[Guest]: and Indian literature too is hugely different.
[Guest]: So to say that these are Western values and we're trying to apply them to Indian reality
[Guest]: that also does not work I think because Indian reality comes from a particular milieu.
[Guest]: I mean you are sort of so you have to look at it from sort of
[Guest]: you base yourself in that milieu and then look at it.
[Guest]: So for instance a writer like Vinod Kumar Shukla, I mean where is he coming from?
[Guest]: I mean he's writing about these small towns, very ordinary day
[Guest]: some man is walking down the street and some other man is observing him
[Guest]: and he thinks oh this man went this way and he again he's going this way
[Guest]: without having come back even once you know.
[Guest]: So there's this absurd kind of quality to it and it gives a sort of space
[Guest]: to very lower middle class lives that are normally one would think are very cramped
[Guest]: and living in very sort of poor circumstances whatever
[Guest]: but I mean he adds this kind of very sort of almost playful element to the whole thing.
[Guest]: So I mean he is one writer.
[Guest]: I mean there are so many writers who are writing different things
[Guest]: even in Hindi or in Bangla there'd be possibly many more
[Guest]: and Bangla is sort of very well-developed literature.
[Guest]: Malayalam as we have seen has so many different registers.
[Guest]: So it's very hard to say you know that we can train a particular kind of lens
[Guest]: you know to look at these things.
[Guest]: You just have to adapt to what is being written and where it's set
[Guest]: and you know you judge it on its own ground you know it happens like that I think
[Guest]: and also this whole thing of languages being expressionist or minimalistic.
[Guest]: Okay Japanese one can say yes it is minimalistic but for instance Urdu.
[Guest]: I think Urdu is so difficult to translate because I think it's one of the languages
[Guest]: in which the form is the content.
[Guest]: I mean the way you say a thing is what it is you know it's just there's nothing else.
[Guest]: So that form is very difficult to express in another language.
[Guest]: It's a very light, it's a very weightless language
[Guest]: and it has these very fine sentiments a lot of subtlety.
[Guest]: For instance I was telling someone just the other day that there's this person I know
[Guest]: the son of my famous I mean the writer I'm very fond of Nair Masood
[Unknown]: whose book you have right here.
[Guest]: So he's my absolute favorite in Urdu.
[Guest]: So his son is called Timsal.
[Guest]: So I wondered what Timsal meant.
[Guest]: Then someone told me that it means a crack in a mirror.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Guest]: So I wondered where that came from.
[Guest]: So I went into it a little bit and found out that this boy is so beautiful
[Guest]: that when he looks at himself in the mirror, the mirror cracks.
[Guest]: So the subtlety of that thought you know a mirror can actually crack
[Guest]: when someone is looking into it because it can't take the beauty.
[Guest]: So that's a thought that comes in a language like Urdu.
[Guest]: I don't know which other French possibly I mean some language
[Guest]: would have to have a very fine kind of it comes after years and years of
[Guest]: you know thinking and feeling and delicate sensibility.
[Guest]: So there are I mean examples in all the languages that prove
[Guest]: the other example to be untrue.
[Guest]: So one can't really generalize my whole take on this language thing.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also struck by another thing you said about Premchand is that
[Amit Varma]: he was a man in a hurry and obviously he wrote more than a dozen novels
[Amit Varma]: 300 stories, essays, editorials, letters, plays, biographies, blah blah blah
[Amit Varma]: all of that and actually one writer I can think of who's more prolific
[Amit Varma]: but obviously a complete outlier is a French writer Georges Simenon
[Guest]: who wrote some 400 novels.
[Guest]: Yeah but he wrote only novels.
[Amit Varma]: He wrote only novels yeah but 400 of them.
[Guest]: 400 novels and they are completely like quite a few of them are mystery stories.
[Guest]: I mean at least the ones that I've read.
[Amit Varma]: A bunch of them are the May Gray books.
[Guest]: Yeah the May Gray books.
[Guest]: But his serious stuff is really good.
[Guest]: I haven't actually read very much of Simenon except these
[Guest]: and I think one more which is also very different
[Guest]: but I wouldn't put them in the same category.
[Unknown]: Sure, sure, sure.
[Guest]: Because I mean and I think of say for instance Charles Dickens
[Guest]: or the major writers of the West Dickens or Maupassant
[Guest]: or you know people I mean they've all written very fine stuff
[Guest]: but nobody has actually written such a lot.
[Unknown]: So much, so much.
[Guest]: And so Premchand is not just a writer he's an influencer of that age
[Guest]: you know he just he's forming that age you know he's like shaping the times.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The times are shaping him and he's shaping the times.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the reasons that you mentioned in that lovely essay
[Amit Varma]: at the start of that book The History of Selected Stories which you edited
[Amit Varma]: is you speak about how he saw art as always having a purpose
[Amit Varma]: his writing is having a purpose.
[Amit Varma]: And like in 1936 he gave the speech at the Progressive Writers Conference
[Amit Varma]: where he was a chairman where which is called the aim of literature
[Unknown]: where he spoke about you know how these social aims
[Amit Varma]: are so incredibly important in you know showing the lives of the underprivileged
[Amit Varma]: and exposing oppression and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: What do you sort of feel about that because Milan Kundera of course
[Amit Varma]: among so many others has written about how that the moment literature
[Amit Varma]: goes towards polemic or goes towards having a particular political purpose
[Amit Varma]: it ceases to be literature it ceases to be art.
[Amit Varma]: And in your own writing the very little of it that I've read in English
[Amit Varma]: though I plan to kind of read all of it soon
[Amit Varma]: in your own writing you show no signs of that.
[Amit Varma]: Your own writing show an interior life of the characters that they are
[Amit Varma]: and they do to me what you know I think great art does
[Amit Varma]: is that it awakens something in me.
[Amit Varma]: It captures a little bit of the human condition to use that slightly pompous cliche.
[Amit Varma]: So what is your conception therefore of literature like people will often ask
[Amit Varma]: that like on the one hand I you know tell my writing students for example
[Amit Varma]: that be an indiscriminate reader if you enjoy reading something read it.
[Amit Varma]: Don't pass value judgment that this is a pulp book
[Amit Varma]: and this is serious literature and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time you know there is literature and there is non-literature.
[Amit Varma]: It's very nebulous and I find it hard to kind of define that.
[Amit Varma]: So what would your sense of that be like where does your sense grow
[Amit Varma]: like as a kid of course you're reading in this indiscriminately
[Amit Varma]: as all of us who grew up in India before a certain year did
[Amit Varma]: because books were so hard to get hold of we read everything we get.
[Amit Varma]: But at what stage does you begin to realize that this is something
[Amit Varma]: called literature and I want to do it and this is how it is different
[Amit Varma]: and do you feel that Premchand's sort of having this sort of social objective
[Amit Varma]: as part of his work do you think it affects that in some way?
[Guest]: I think you know Amit I think it's the literature is also very influenced
[Guest]: by the age in which you are writing.
[Guest]: I mean he's writing at a time when firstly there is no literature in Hindi
[Guest]: which can be called serious literature and then he's writing at a time
[Guest]: of great social unrest he's sort of trying to you know sort of oppose
[Guest]: the British and he's trying to you know he has his literature has a purpose
[Guest]: he wants to do something with that so he and he wants to write a lot
[Guest]: he wants to you know hurry through it when you forward towards his mission.
[Guest]: So I think that changes the tone of the whole thing.
[Guest]: So it's a different sort of literature I wouldn't say that this is not literature
[Guest]: and that is literature because Milan Kundera or somebody in the West
[Guest]: I mean they have grown out of the circumstances that they have experienced.
[Guest]: So it all depends on that and also depends on what you're trying to do with it.
[Guest]: So he has a very definite purpose and I think it's very fine literature.
[Guest]: I mean he's uneven Premchand is very uneven some of his things
[Guest]: are much finer than others but on the whole I would say that he writes
[Guest]: something that for the common man in India I mean you go anywhere
[Guest]: everybody has read something of Premchand.
[Guest]: So for him to touch some kind of deep core in such a vast you know part
[Guest]: of Indian society at any rate so there has to be something in it.
[Guest]: It can't just be this is not literature there's something else that is finer.
[Guest]: This I mean this is a much later thing when you talk of Kundera
[Guest]: or talk of the writers of the West this is a later thing.
[Guest]: This whole development in this thing of writing how does it take place?
[Guest]: I mean the writing itself becomes much more dense you're spending more time
[Guest]: over it you're sort of thinking about things in a different way.
[Guest]: So it comes from there I think it's hard to compare the two.
[Guest]: I mean there's you know the situation is completely different.
[Amit Varma]: Right so let's get back to your growth in this period of time where
[Amit Varma]: you grew up in this atmosphere you're reading a lot you're observing a lot
[Amit Varma]: though you said it's with you know just because it's so dull but I don't
[Amit Varma]: completely buy that but you're observing a lot you're growing a lot you want to
[Amit Varma]: write you've written that early story I think Lucky Horace or something.
[Guest]: It's just a copy of one of the enlightened stories I'd been reading at the time.
[Amit Varma]: The title sounds very enlightening.
[Guest]: Yes I mean it's not I don't call it my first story actually it was a discovery
[Guest]: that I could write rather than a story that I wrote I would put it like that.
[Guest]: I mean of course this was something unstated inside me that I would write
[Guest]: that I would be a writer I mean I never said it to myself but I somehow that
[Guest]: knowledge was there because it was just something that one did it was just
[Guest]: something that one fell into I would say because everyone around me was writing
[Guest]: my entire family my mother wrote my grandmother wrote my aunt wrote on both
[Guest]: sides my uncle wrote his wife wrote I mean everybody was writing so it was it
[Guest]: felt like this is something that one does you know this is what one will do
[Guest]: and then I when I started reading it also sort of sets off something we knew
[Guest]: so at a point when I was reading and I was trying to decide which language to
[Guest]: write in and it came to me very late that I could actually write in both and
[Guest]: also the reading set off this thing I could be reading about something set in
[Guest]: Paris or in New York or wherever but somehow the stories the universal story
[Guest]: was the same so I just felt that all these stories about me you know they are
[Guest]: like about me so it was a very peculiar realization at that point you know this
[Guest]: was my journey of reading in my school days or college early college days so I
[Guest]: would just spend days reading there was nothing else to do we did not have
[Guest]: television and thank goodness we didn't you know we didn't have TV or any other
[Guest]: screen to look at so you either read the world or you world outside or you read
[Guest]: your book you know so it was basically a choice between the two and I did both I
[Guest]: mean I looked around me the house and the plants and the insects and whatever
[Guest]: so I mean this thing of nature became very strong in me and plus reading all
[Guest]: these other books that were set in different places but I felt that they
[Guest]: resonated with me and they were all about me and at some point they generated the
[Guest]: thought that perhaps I too can create a world of my own like these people have
[Guest]: written I can also write no so it I thought about these things when I was
[Amit Varma]: not writing yeah I mean in a sense I think about current times and I wonder
[Amit Varma]: how the sensory overload of the modern times affects us as people like if I was
[Amit Varma]: growing up today I don't know if I'd become the kind of reader I did become I
[Amit Varma]: read a lot as a kid that's a habit I lost as an adult but you know today you
[Amit Varma]: know today you're surrounded with so many things there's always YouTube
[Amit Varma]: there's Instagram and it's very fleeting like an observation that I think
[Amit Varma]: Jonathan Haidt once made is that you would imagine that today because of the
[Amit Varma]: internet you have access to all the knowledge all the art of ages past which
[Amit Varma]: you know people like us didn't but the counter to that is that what most people
[Amit Varma]: are consuming most of this time is something produced in the last three days
[Amit Varma]: and that's it whereas I think you know that you and I growing up you know a
[Amit Varma]: decade and a half apart but whatever couple of decades apart would still have
[Amit Varma]: lived in a time where you read whatever you could get where you didn't have
[Amit Varma]: smartphones to look at all day and 300 television channels and so on no while
[Amit Varma]: we were having lunch earlier you know I told you an anecdote and then you told
[Amit Varma]: me about the short story that you read that you remembered vividly and I think
[Amit Varma]: it's called jealousy I'm not very sure but I think it's called jealousy yeah
[Amit Varma]: possibly great I'll look it up and link it in the show notes if it's available
[Guest]: anywhere yeah but please check the title because I don't remember it so well I
[Guest]: think it's called jealousy if I seem to remember I do that so whatever we whatever
[Guest]: I'll get back home and tell you what it is because I probably have the book
[Amit Varma]: somewhere on my Kindle I think okay so my question here is is that even I find
[Amit Varma]: sometimes that things I remember really vividly in terms of books that I have
[Amit Varma]: read or stories that I have read or you know movies that I have seen are things
[Amit Varma]: that I saw at a particular phase in life where I won't remember something I saw
[Amit Varma]: five years ago so vividly but something that I saw when I was 15 or 20 I'll still
[Amit Varma]: remember even if it didn't move me so hard then it's something that I'll still
[Amit Varma]: kind of remember like recently I was like chatting with a friend and I suddenly
[Amit Varma]: remembered this and I read all the Russians when I was a kid and I remember
[Amit Varma]: this very powerful story which didn't strike me so hard at the time but I
[Amit Varma]: suddenly remembered it and I was like wow by Leonard Andreev called the abyss
[Amit Varma]: which if I remember correctly and now I'm remembering from memory is about a
[Amit Varma]: guy who goes on this hike with a bunch of friends they find a girl and they rape
[Amit Varma]: her and they kill her but he doesn't participate and then later on he goes
[Amit Varma]: back alone and he has sex with the dead body and that's a whole story and it's a
[Unknown]: very interior kind of story you know these bare details don't suffice and it's
[Amit Varma]: it's such a sort of powerful memory even though at the time I kind of didn't
[Amit Varma]: notice it who were the writers who sort of that I mean you're recounting this
[Guest]: story actually put me in mind of another one which is fairly not very similar but
[Guest]: fairly similar I mean like there's this it's by Raymond Carver and it's called
[Guest]: I think so much water so close to home have you read that story?
[Amit Varma]: I definitely have but I don't remember the specific story but I'm a big Carver
[Guest]: fan I think it's one of the stories Robert Altman also made in his film
[Guest]: Shortcuts. Yes he did yeah Shortcuts so this one this group of friends I think
[Guest]: three or four of them have gone out for a picnic or they've gone out for an outing
[Guest]: fishing I think and when they are sitting there they see that there's a dead body
[Guest]: which is sort of stuck on a plant on a tree somewhere there and they look at it
[Guest]: and they wonder who it could be it's a woman you know clothing torn and all that
[Guest]: she's just there and they wonder who it could be but they don't give much
[Guest]: attention to it and they carry on with their fishing and their little picnic and
[Guest]: all that and they spend the time that they were there for and they go home and
[Guest]: then this guy tells his wife that there was this woman that they found on the
[Guest]: tree over there so this wife she's completely stunned by what these people
[Guest]: how they could still you know gone have gone on fishing and with this woman
[Guest]: there and she begins to doubt the kind of person and she begins to think that
[Guest]: what if they have killed this girl or if he has killed the girl you know so all
[Guest]: sorts of doubts get created in her mind and I think this story goes on like that
[Guest]: and then there's too much that that thing comes between them and it sort of
[Guest]: splits them up I think it ends like that that they split up or I mean I don't
[Guest]: remember the ending I seem to forget endings it's something like that I think
[Guest]: they probably split up or there's certainly a great coldness between them
[Guest]: after that incident but of course I mean it's got a similar theme of you know
[Guest]: Kavya is great at that you know he's just so I mean he writes in so few words
[Unknown]: and he just puts it across like you know it just gets straight to you and there's
[Guest]: a wonderful poem by him which is called I think limits limits have you read I
[Guest]: haven't read limits so limits is this poem his poems are also like his short
[Guest]: stories because his short stories are like poems they are short and the poems
[Guest]: are long this one certainly is longish and it's like a short story so in this
[Guest]: these people have gone out duck shooting and these two friends have gone duck
[Guest]: shooting in their shooting and shooting and they're killing and all the ducks
[Guest]: falling around them and they are they still have so much shooting left in them
[Guest]: but they get you know they want to meal they are hungry so they go to this farm
[Guest]: which is there and the farmer has this barrel in which he has it's a goose
[Guest]: actually they are not ducks but the geese so this farmer has got a goose in that
[Guest]: thing and the goose can't get out and it's just being given food and it's just
[Guest]: stuck there it just stays there always and it's a great decoy for the other
[Guest]: geese to come and they're just thinking then these geese come and they get a good
[Guest]: shot and all that so but this sight of that goose gets him thinking this person
[Guest]: who's writing the story the narrator and he thinks of limits that if a person can
[Guest]: be limited in that world and it can live it can survive you know then then you
[Guest]: can survive anything you can just you know so it's so beautifully done that
[Guest]: poem you know that it's just about the limits of human endurance with limits of
[Guest]: endurance that can also become human endurance that duck goose becomes a
[Guest]: metaphor for endurance so I found it wonderful that poem it's I mean just
[Guest]: stayed with me because I just affected me very deeply when I read it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah Kavar is great I mean Cathedral is a particular favorite and the interesting
[Amit Varma]: thing about Kavar is that some of the credit for his short stories during that
[Unknown]: golden period you know what we talk about when we talk about love and yeah
[Unknown]: Cathedral and that whole period is given to his editor at Esquire Gordon Lish
[Unknown]: if I remember correctly yeah who was apparently a great editor and would
[Unknown]: really cut cut them down and make them sparse yeah and Kavar after he split
[Guest]: from Lish couldn't quite repeat that same kind of magic which is also.
[Guest]: Yeah but apparently I mean the stories are there because of his editor and
[Guest]: there's stories originally written by Kavar just not like that at all so in a
[Guest]: sense half the credit goes to the editor also yeah for this whole thing that
[Guest]: Kavar is known for is you know brevity and all that so it actually that is the
[Guest]: credit to the editor doing that because his own stories apparently were not as
[Amit Varma]: short in sort of brevity as they are now.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense that also speaks to the art versus artist debate where in this
[Guest]: case the art is just standing on its own anyway you know what is Kavar but a name
[Guest]: you know who cares if Shakespeare wrote Shakespeare's plays.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah exactly yeah who cares yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So the question I was coming at was who are the writers who affected you greatly
[Amit Varma]: when you were a child I won't say influence because one really never knows
[Unknown]: somebody's influence for a long time it's all subterranean but who were the
[Amit Varma]: writers you really liked then or was there ever a period of time where you
[Amit Varma]: read someone and you said I want to write like this person this is so amazing.
[Guest]: Childhood I mean there were of course many of these books at home that I read
[Guest]: without understanding them you know they were all these like you said
[Guest]: Jampal Sathra and people like that I mean who one could not make sense of at
[Guest]: that time but one felt good that one had read them.
[Guest]: And then of course I discovered the Russians Chekhov, Chekhov is a particular
[Guest]: favorite and then as I grew older that Kafka became a great favorite of mine.
[Guest]: I loved Kafka completely you know just I used to search out books I used to there
[Guest]: was in the library at college there was this picture book of Kafka's Prague I
[Guest]: used to sit somewhere in the behind the shelves and just to pour over it and you
[Guest]: know just hours and hours of Kafka so he was one of my favorite writers at that
[Guest]: point and I think he I may have tried to copy him I mean I certainly put on that
[Guest]: stance which I wrote about in my essay that this despairing stance you know
[Guest]: Kafka and it was completely absurd in my situation but I mean one tries to emulate
[Guest]: some people that one begins to admire so Kafka was one of those writers and then
[Guest]: of course there were many people I read it's very hard to I became very fond of
[Guest]: WG Sebald at one place Sebald, Sebald I don't know how you pronounce it.
[Amit Varma]: Sebald, Sebald whatever.
[Guest]: Anyway I became very fond of him and this was also because I came across his
[Guest]: books when I was in Norwich I went there on residency at the University of East
[Guest]: Anglia and my room had this whole collection of Sebald's displayed there
[Guest]: because he had actually taught in that at that University and he had died just the
[Guest]: year before so I came upon him and I just loved the way he wrote I mean it was
[Guest]: very kind of textured writing.
[Guest]: And using photographs and all that.
[Guest]: Using photographs as well, yes very and he sort of the way he could encapsulate a
[Guest]: whole civilization in a walk I mean like he's walking I think the book is Rings of
[Guest]: Saturn I think it is and in which he's taking a walk along the East Anglia coast
[Guest]: and how he's the thoughts in his head and how entire civilizations are covered
[Guest]: during that walk so it's that this whole the largeness of his concepts and the
[Guest]: same thing I came upon in a very different way in Proust also like he's
[Guest]: describing a woman's sleeve the sleeve of a dress which is sort of very loose
[Guest]: and big and how he describes the sleeve it's a sentence goes on for pages and
[Guest]: pages as Proust often tends to do and he starts somewhere and he ends up somewhere
[Guest]: completely different so and in the middle he's covered this entire lifetime
[Guest]: and entire sort of you know whole gamut of things he's just covered in that one
[Guest]: description of a dress you know so it's it was fascinating to me how these things
[Guest]: can you know they can be done like this this kind of and it's not particularly
[Guest]: experimental style or anything this is the way his thoughts have gone and I
[Guest]: realized that writing is actually just just what it is a way of thinking you
[Amit Varma]: know you think like that so you write like that you know so there are no
[Guest]: limits as yeah yeah yeah no limits absolutely so these these have been some
[Guest]: of my favorites and of course then Urdu Nair Masood who's staring me in the face
[Guest]: right here I'm really fond of him in fact I was thinking of translating him
[Guest]: also and I went and met him once and he was very keen that yeah but he was he
[Guest]: wanted his stories more in Hindi rather than English because English already had
[Guest]: been done by Umar Memon who's his great friend and editor in America so he was
[Guest]: very keen that they should come out in the Hindi script because people here
[Guest]: couldn't read his Urdu so I thought of doing that too but then I mean I even
[Guest]: took along a contract Harper Collins had given me a contract to go and get it
[Guest]: signed he said oh you just put what you like in it and sign it but as it turned
[Guest]: out it was a very daunting task because his stories are very difficult I don't
[Guest]: know if you've read any Nair Masood or I mean not in the original obviously
[Guest]: yeah because he's he's very very in fact a bit Kafka maybe that's why it appealed
[Guest]: to me in the first place but but his thoughts are very very like a distillation
[Guest]: I mean there's something going on in the and and they are always set in these
[Guest]: very sort of lower class Muslim localities and the kind of things he
[Guest]: describes are almost read like magic realism because we don't know that world
[Guest]: no so that and his thoughts and very very subtle like there's this story
[Guest]: called Essence of Camphor which is the Ithre Kafur it's called in Urdu and it's
[Guest]: about the whole process of making perfume and how the vapors rise from it
[Guest]: and you know it's just he describes very kind of abstract things and he links
[Guest]: them up with something completely different so he has this wonderful feel
[Guest]: so Nair Masood was also one of the people I was reading and Isma Chuktai
[Guest]: in the Urdu writers Isma Chuktai is fantastic she's she's very nice and we
[Guest]: also have like Alok my cousin and Francesca I don't know if you know
[Guest]: Francesca Orsini I mean she's also a close friend so when she comes so three
[Guest]: of us form an Urdu reading group so we pick up these and Francesca usually
[Guest]: brings something nice along from England and then we sit together and we read
[Guest]: these Urdu texts so one of the things we read was Umrao Jaana Da and I did not
[Guest]: know how what a wonderful book it is you know it's just absolutely fantastic I
[Guest]: mean it's set in that time 1857 it captures the events of that era and this
[Guest]: and it's so I mean it moves so quickly and so that was one of the things we
[Guest]: read and these are the Urdu books I'm talking of then Hindi of course my
[Guest]: favorites have been Vinod Kumar Shukla and Jyotsna Millan I don't know if you
[Guest]: read her but she's she's a fine writer my friend also she was my friend who
[Guest]: died a few years ago sadly so she's there's a Hindi also there's there's
[Guest]: enough to read you know there's plenty to read in Hindi and Urdu of course
[Amit Varma]: this is sort of the other thought that strikes me and it struck me a lot over
[Amit Varma]: the last three or four years because before that for most of my life I've
[Amit Varma]: assumed that hey it's a globalized world it's open there is a internet everybody
[Amit Varma]: can read everything everything is open to me in a sense it's accessible to me
[Amit Varma]: and I've realized recently that that's not true it's it's an illusion that
[Amit Varma]: English-speaking elites can sometimes have because they think that you know
[Unknown]: English is the center of the universe or everything and you know in past
[Amit Varma]: episodes I've realized that there is you know for example just moving for a
[Amit Varma]: moment to politics I've understood that Ram Guha had written this excellent essay
[Amit Varma]: about how there are no right-wing intellectuals in India and that's
[Amit Varma]: something I broadly believed in I thought everything that you see from the
[Amit Varma]: right is bigotry which is cloaked up in a kind of pseudo intellectualism but I
[Amit Varma]: have since kind of been convinced by friends who've been on this show who've
[Amit Varma]: done their reading in Hindi and other languages that there is an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: tradition one may disagree with it strongly but there is a coherent
[Amit Varma]: intellectual tradition of ideas which English speakers are kind of missing out
[Amit Varma]: and sort of moving back to literature I had that same sense where I was trying
[Amit Varma]: to read things by you and I read a couple of some of your essays and a
[Amit Varma]: couple of stories in the magazine Pratilipi which I'll link to from the
[Amit Varma]: show notes which I absolutely loved and I'd also like to discuss but nothing else
[Amit Varma]: I mean everything else is in Hindi and I can read in Hindi and I intend to start
[Amit Varma]: reading more in Hindi anyway so I will get down to reading them but that world
[Amit Varma]: is close to me you know when someone sits there and they talk about writers
[Amit Varma]: who write in English and have you read so-and-so and have you read so-and-so
[Unknown]: and I've generally read them you know I've read Sebald, I've read Kavar, I've
[Unknown]: read all these people but I haven't read the other names that you took in the
[Amit Varma]: other languages it's like that world is completely close to me now my question
[Amit Varma]: is is that world in a sense then lost or is there hope because you know how do we
[Amit Varma]: kind of reach that more or more more and more what you have is sort of a
[Amit Varma]: homogenization of cultures and societies and economies like even in English
[Amit Varma]: Snigdha Poonam the journalist had been on the show before she's written a book
[Amit Varma]: called Dreamers where she writes about how in small towns there is this craze
[Amit Varma]: for everyone to learn English at first just at a functional level but there is
[Amit Varma]: this kind of craze and also there is this kind of snobbery the reverse of what
[Amit Varma]: you probably felt at home where people are embarrassed to talk in their
[Unknown]: vernaculars and their specific you know I had a question from a friend of mine
[Amit Varma]: who had done my writing course where he said that he writes in Kannada but he
[Unknown]: writes in a particular dialect of Kannada not the mainstream thing so he's
[Amit Varma]: saying that should I write in that because that's what comes most naturally
[Amit Varma]: or should I try to write in proper Kannada and it's a I don't know how to
[Amit Varma]: answer that because part of me says that no you got to be authentic to yourself
[Unknown]: and write in that dialect where everything is coming naturally to you
[Amit Varma]: it's authentic but you also want to be read and maybe that's a dying language
[Guest]: yeah is this something that you kind of think I have thought about it quite a lot
[Guest]: actually but I think it's something to do with our education system I mean like
[Guest]: we are not taught any of our own texts you know Sanskrit or Farsi or Urdu or
[Guest]: whatever we are not taught at the school level we should have something like that
[Guest]: and the text that they do prescribe in Hindi for instance is one language that
[Guest]: they do have texts in but they are so boring they are so utterly boring which
[Guest]: child will read you know Jago Mohan Pyare or something like I mean you know
[Guest]: one of those things why will they read all these moralistic and weird sort of
[Guest]: narratives or like lives of patriots or things like that who will read those I
[Guest]: mean you have to have interesting material for children to start with I
[Guest]: mean you are doing the language a service if you have something interesting
[Guest]: and they could have Sanskrit texts you know there's so much erotic literature
[Guest]: in Sanskrit for instance there's so much poetry there's so much nature writing
[Guest]: the Kalidas I think of Kalidas and Meghdootam and you know things like that
[Guest]: we are completely cut off from that all because of I think our education system
[Guest]: which is all skewed and it is very heavily weighted in favor of English and
[Guest]: the lower middle classes who do not have access to that education are still
[Guest]: reading very widely in other languages in Hindi like when I when I started
[Guest]: writing in Hindi I used to get so much so many letters from everywhere I got a
[Guest]: letter from Goa jail I remember people are reading these things and they are
[Guest]: probably not buying their own books but they are circulating the same books so
[Guest]: much is being read I think it's a problem of the middle class rather than
[Guest]: other classes and middle class is a small class but still it's the most
[Guest]: powerful class and English is perceived as the language of success or power or
[Guest]: whatever you know English so the whole world becomes open to you so I don't
[Guest]: blame these people I mean it's just I think we should introduce some of these
[Guest]: nice texts in at the school level so that people don't go away from the
[Guest]: languages I mean they behave as if English Hindi is a foreign language you
[Guest]: know they behave as if they are sort of native speakers of English and Hindi has
[Guest]: somehow come in and this is some foreign language that they have to learn so the
[Guest]: education system I think has to be overhauled in a very big way for people
[Guest]: to develop an interest in I mean it's not the same situation for Marathi or
[Guest]: Bangla or Malayalam I mean people are you know doing work they are sort of
[Guest]: being read I mean it's not the same it's the northern India the Hindi belt I
[Guest]: would say Delhi, UP you know all these places where English is gains primacy
[Guest]: for other reasons I think than literary so it's just I think it can be fixed if
[Guest]: I don't know I mean if they'll have to really sort of do hack job, hack it job,
[Guest]: hatchet job whatever you call it hatchet job with the education system and
[Amit Varma]: overhaul it completely. I have no hopes of a top-down interventions working or
[Amit Varma]: even the education system necessarily changing this I'm more interested in how
[Amit Varma]: things happen in a bottom-up way through the culture and all that and there's an
[Amit Varma]: interesting sort of anecdote you mentioned in your essay in the Premchand
[Amit Varma]: book where you talk about how you went to the village where he was born for his
[Amit Varma]: 125th anniversary in 2006 and while you were waiting for things to happen and all
[Amit Varma]: of that you notice that there were so many people sitting around everywhere you know
[Amit Varma]: under shelter not under shelter sitting on the ground just waiting for this whole
[Amit Varma]: thing to happen and at that point you're musing is that okay I know why I am here
[Amit Varma]: but why are these people here and you pointed out how some of them obviously
[Amit Varma]: many of them must be Premchand readers and some of them could in fact be
[Amit Varma]: characters out of his stories as you said and that struck me is again something
[Amit Varma]: interesting to explore because I think there was a time in our culture where individual
[Amit Varma]: figures could play that kind of a very profound part in people's lives where
[Amit Varma]: people are reading a writer in this case Premchand and finding so much to
[Amit Varma]: identify with that you know it becomes something that is important for them and
[Amit Varma]: what has happened in modern times I think and tell me what you feel about
[Amit Varma]: this is that in my view what has happened is that this kind of thing is
[Amit Varma]: becoming less and less possible in the sense that one there is a lot more art
[Amit Varma]: and many more artists which is a good thing but also whatever experiences we
[Amit Varma]: are having a very fragmented in a sense so it won't just be one writer who moves
[Amit Varma]: me with his five books it will be many many writers whose snippets I'll read on
[Amit Varma]: Instagram or Facebook or whatever which will have an effect on me and the whole
[Amit Varma]: sort of thing kind of gets broken down leading me to wonder whether another
[Amit Varma]: Premchand is even possible today or maybe another Premchand is possible in
[Amit Varma]: a new medium like vlogs or you know Instagram for example I mean what would
[Amit Varma]: an Instagram Premchand look like I can't imagine maybe like the humans of New York
[Amit Varma]: blog that took off a few years ago but I'm just thinking aloud so what's your
[Amit Varma]: thought on the changing nature of the role that writers play within a culture
[Amit Varma]: or I'll say in a general sense I'll say artists or creators whatever term you
[Amit Varma]: would like to use the role that they play within a culture and is that
[Amit Varma]: diminishing partly because there is less dullness people have so much to do in
[Amit Varma]: their lives they don't have to read it's no longer the one entertaining thing
[Amit Varma]: that there is for them there is so much else to do what's your sense of this
[Guest]: well I think as far as I mean you mentioned all those people who had come
[Guest]: for Premchand's that ceremony that they had but that had also something to do
[Guest]: with the fact that Premchand actually established the common man as a valid
[Guest]: character in literature before that the stories were not about the common man and
[Guest]: people could not identify with those and these people are almost it's they are
[Guest]: vindicated in some sense that they have been the existence had been noticed
[Guest]: their lives are worthy of being written about you know so it's a moral value
[Guest]: that he brings to those writings so and this question also ties up with the
[Guest]: later one that you asked about writers what can who can replace Premchand that
[Guest]: kind of thing but I think it's a moral universe the moral universe has
[Guest]: completely radically changed and the role of the writer has also changed
[Guest]: correspondingly the role of the writer the image of the writer has also
[Guest]: undergone a sea change because of that you know I mean earlier writers like we
[Guest]: perceived the writer as someone who's you know hiding away in some corner
[Guest]: scribbling his things and you know he's committed he lives in poverty he lives
[Guest]: you know hand-to-mouth very much like the figure Premchand is and he's like
[Guest]: that and now but now that has changed writers are no longer like that writers
[Guest]: like to be seen I mean you see them everywhere you see them at literary
[Guest]: festivals you see them when you get a prize for in that a prize ceremony I
[Guest]: mean everyone is visible there's so many cameras there's so many lights there's
[Guest]: so much you know flashing thing going on you know writers are much more in the
[Guest]: limelight but in a sense I mean I know I'm making this horrible generalization
[Guest]: but it's like people are becoming clones you know very kind of many books that
[Guest]: you read feel very much like the other book you know there's not much it's
[Guest]: because there's a lot of emptiness I think in books that are being written
[Guest]: because they're being written in a hurry they are being written for a particular
[Guest]: reason they are being written maybe because they can get a prize or maybe
[Guest]: they can be published so they are being I don't really understand the need for
[Guest]: this kind of frothy writing and creative schools creative writing schools I think
[Guest]: have maybe contributed to this to a certain kind of writing which is the
[Guest]: same for everyone you know they have this smart writing which comes from
[Guest]: there you learn how to show not tell is the typical phrase that is used now in
[Guest]: the West so that on describing things and but you sometimes you are you search
[Guest]: for a single insight in a book you don't find it you know there are lots of
[Guest]: descriptions very authentic stuff and the very much related to what is going
[Guest]: on outside in the society but somehow it just lacks that spark because they don't
[Guest]: give any original insight many books of course there'll be many exceptions to
[Guest]: this too but this is what I have found that there's a certain sameness to the
[Guest]: writing that's happening and maybe it's because of the hurry or because I mean
[Guest]: everyone is absorbing similar stuff around and writing in English definitely
[Guest]: can only come from a certain class because a lower middle class person is
[Guest]: never going to write in English so it reflects that class background too so
[Guest]: well that's I think it strikes me that there are really two kinds of writers
[Amit Varma]: and one kind of writer is in love with the notion of being a writer everything
[Unknown]: that it involves I will write these kind of serious literary books and I'll get
[Amit Varma]: long-listed for the booker and blah blah blah and I think the kind of writers I
[Amit Varma]: end up liking are just writers who just want to write and therefore there is less
[Amit Varma]: artifice in that there is you know it's not contrived they are trying to write a
[Amit Varma]: particular kind of book which is in vogue I want to sort of double click on a
[Amit Varma]: phrase that you used at the start of your answer which was moral universe
[Amit Varma]: where you pointed out that the moral universe has changed and therefore so has
[Guest]: a writer within it what do you mean by that well moral universe has suppose I
[Guest]: mean that the world is much more complex now and it's not so easy to chart out a
[Guest]: course in which in which you can know which is what is the right thing to do
[Guest]: you know I mean there's nothing really it's it's in a sense much much more
[Guest]: fragmented than the times that Plameson lived in and when there was a definite
[Guest]: goal that we were trying to achieve independence and the you know stopping
[Guest]: the oppression of the farmers of the poor people so all that has changed and
[Guest]: I mean I presume we are talking only of English writing in English just now
[Guest]: whatever sense you meant that in when you spoke of moral yeah moral universe is
[Guest]: I think just this you know just the whole urban mess that we live in it's
[Guest]: very very fragmented very diverse there's too much happening there's not
[Guest]: enough direction no so it's it's a very confused world so I mean to find
[Guest]: something of value is can be a struggle in this kind of world and I'm not sure
[Guest]: that every many writers are up to it I don't know I can't give you concrete
[Guest]: examples just now but I have my feeling is that there is nothing that we are
[Guest]: striving for as such you mean in an individual sense or social sense
[Guest]: individual sense in an individual sense there is not what is one has to have
[Guest]: some kind of thing that one is trying to achieve when you are writing a book
[Amit Varma]: yeah in the in the sense that you mean that Plameson very clearly did in terms
[Guest]: of the social messaging he's trying to reach some thing he's trying to you know
[Guest]: anti-colonial fighting colonialism fighting whatever you know all that
[Guest]: stuff is gone so now we have this of course there's much fine writing
[Guest]: happening even now as we have recently discovered but there's there's much more
[Guest]: writing going on and I'm not sure that all of it will is worth the read I think
[Amit Varma]: like that I'm just thinking aloud another way of thinking of that is
[Amit Varma]: there's something called Sturgeon's law which basically it was first I think
[Amit Varma]: meant for science fiction but it applies to everything eventually and Sturgeon's
[Amit Varma]: law is that 95% of everything is crap that's Sturgeon's law and what happens
[Amit Varma]: sometimes is that we look at the past and there's some selection bias creeping
[Amit Varma]: in because obviously what we remember of the past is all the good stuff the
[Unknown]: highlights but when we look at the present it's all hundred percent that is
[Amit Varma]: out there so it seems like oh those were golden times but these are not and I
[Amit Varma]: think that one there must have been as much crap back then and to a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: crap wouldn't have got published because it was so much harder to get published
[Amit Varma]: in terms of gatekeepers while today without reference to anything that we
[Amit Varma]: might have gone through in the recent past in terms of the reading we've done
[Amit Varma]: without reference to that I think publishers are a lot more indiscriminate
[Amit Varma]: in that they'll put out anything yeah and in a sense that's a good thing that
[Amit Varma]: the barriers of publishing are much lower but you know so therefore you will
[Unknown]: simply have more of the crap and that 5% just seems to be so little and
[Unknown]: swimming in that sea and a lot of it lost to people like me because I might be
[Guest]: restricted to reading one language or a particular I never discovered that right
[Guest]: yeah and we also we also don't have the advantage of time I mean like if we were
[Guest]: to look at the same stuff say 50 years down the line we would probably the good
[Guest]: names or whatever names that we remember now from the past the similar names
[Guest]: would have cropped up then but we don't have the advantage of that because we
[Guest]: don't know that will only show itself with time in the classics or whatever
[Guest]: you call them you know the good books of this time will only pop up you know
[Guest]: later so how do we I mean who has withstood the stand of time we can't find that out now you know
[Amit Varma]: so in the interest of following the digressive nature of this podcast the thought
[Amit Varma]: that just comes to mind and I'll throw it at you I was watching this vlog by this
[Amit Varma]: fantastic musician called Rick Beato he's a 59 year old guy he does this thing on
[Amit Varma]: YouTube where he'll talk about music or he has a series which is called what makes
[Unknown]: this song great where he'll break down a three-minute song and yeah talk about
[Amit Varma]: different aspects of that one of his recent videos was this complete rant
[Amit Varma]: very completely lost it because he came across an article this guy had written
[Amit Varma]: where this guy said that you know Paul Simon will not be remembered 200 years
[Amit Varma]: from now and he was saying that listen let me tell you something the people who
[Amit Varma]: will be remembered 200 years from now we may not have heard of them today and he
[Unknown]: gave the example of Johann Sebastian Bach the classical composer talking about
[Amit Varma]: how in his own lifetime he wasn't a particularly big deal after his death
[Amit Varma]: there was a kind of Bach reclamation or something I forget there's a term for it
[Amit Varma]: but that made him the legend that we think of him today as well in his own
[Amit Varma]: lifetime he was completely obscure and that seems a fascinating thought to me
[Amit Varma]: that someone who is a great artist today maybe somebody we haven't even heard of
[Unknown]: but 200 years later is regarded that way not that it necessarily makes a
[Unknown]: difference to an artist how he is regarded 200 years later he wants it now
[Amit Varma]: and the other thing is also the role of happenstance in getting noticed
[Amit Varma]: like someone recently put up this long thread about Billy Joel that when Billy
[Amit Varma]: Joel's first album Piano Man came out it was completely unnoticed it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: selling anywhere radio stations weren't playing it it was basically lost and the
[Amit Varma]: music company decided not to do anything with it they were washing their hands off
[Amit Varma]: but there was one listener who felt passionate about it who happened to have
[Amit Varma]: a copy and he went to radio station after radio station after radio station
[Amit Varma]: trying to make them play it and eventually did a quid pro quo with the radio
[Unknown]: station RJ and made him play it and then it became the sensation that it was
[Unknown]: and Billy Joel would probably have gone back to his day job if that hadn't taken
[Guest]: off so the role of happenstance is so incredible.
[Guest]: And I think that's I mean somebody should do a separate project on this the making
[Guest]: of a legend how do legends get made because I mean if you go into individual
[Guest]: lives I mean what is it that has brought them to the fore I mean to a layman
[Guest]: layperson like me one song or one piece of music would perhaps sound very much
[Guest]: similar to the other one but I mean there's something about that one that is
[Guest]: better than this one and of course how does how does it happen that some
[Guest]: people get noticed and some don't there's so much fine writing around but
[Guest]: only some gets noticed.
[Amit Varma]: No and it's not even that the fine writing gets noticed and the non-fine
[Amit Varma]: doesn't like I think there was a social science experiment a few years ago
[Amit Varma]: where people gave a whole the subjects in the experiment these apps which have
[Amit Varma]: and I'm kind of paraphrasing it so obviously the mechanism was slightly
[Amit Varma]: different but in principle it's like this but all these people were given an
[Amit Varma]: app with like 2,000 songs or whatever and they had to listen to whatever they
[Amit Varma]: wanted over a period of time except that in some of them were shown a chart of
[Amit Varma]: what is popular and what is not and they were all shown different charts and in
[Amit Varma]: these different mini universes of these users that they built different songs
[Amit Varma]: rose to the top or went down just depending on pure happenstance you know
[Amit Varma]: you five people could accidentally listen to something and like it and not
[Unknown]: have noticed something else and suddenly just by those five people liking it the
[Guest]: algorithm stayed over and rose to the top.
[Guest]: So it's all a bit of an accident really.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is an accident.
[Amit Varma]: So let's go back more to the accident of life itself in particular yours.
[Amit Varma]: So you know you're a prolific reader you've written this story Lucky Horace
[Amit Varma]: at the age of 8 and gotten published and then you next write when you're late
[Unknown]: 30s 40s whatever much decades pass almost.
[Amit Varma]: What's happening during this period of time and also what is your
[Amit Varma]: conception of yourself and how is it changing because you've said that even
[Amit Varma]: if you didn't articulate it to yourself you felt that there was a writer inside
[Unknown]: you, it was natural. Tell me a little bit about the young Serarai
[Amit Varma]: for example what did you see yourself as and so on.
[Guest]: Well at that point I mean I don't know if I was having any very clear thoughts
[Guest]: about what I am or what where I'm headed or what I'm going to do it was all like
[Guest]: experiencing things as they came along I mean as far as literally pursuit goes
[Guest]: I think my first experiment apart from that story was I also wrote a few
[Guest]: horrible poems which I have completely I've hidden them away and I've thrown
[Guest]: them and nobody has seen them so that little thing happened and then after
[Guest]: that I suppose the translation was the next thing that I tried to bring my hand
[Guest]: to and it started with I think Premchand's story first story that
[Guest]: translated was Bade Bhai Sahib or one of those stories years back I mean
[Guest]: when I may have been in my 20s early 20s something like that so it's been a long
[Guest]: process of groping about for a language that I could write in and the translation
[Guest]: was also a part of that you know because translation and fiction or your own
[Guest]: writing comes from the same place I mean it's the same storehouse of words that
[Guest]: you have inside you so in one you're trying to fish out from that storehouse
[Guest]: and extend it by translations which are someone else's work but you become
[Guest]: they become intimate for you because you have been interacting with them so
[Guest]: closely and the other is your own writing and the translated stuff is also
[Guest]: expanding your own vocabulary your own thoughts you're getting ideas I mean
[Guest]: like someone else's voice that is allowing your own voice to come out you
[Guest]: know you get I mean that happens a lot with reading as well I mean when you
[Guest]: read something and you feel oh this is something that I have something like
[Guest]: this in my own life so you begin to write something which has been set off
[Guest]: a spark has been set off by something else so this I see it as I mean what I
[Guest]: have called it I think somewhere is your life is a series of organic moments
[Guest]: like when you feel lit up by something you see something you experience
[Guest]: something and you feel that there's something special about that moment and
[Guest]: you get a kind of lit up is the word I can think for it so that is somewhere
[Guest]: being stored inside you and when you're writing those moments fall together
[Guest]: somehow and they come out and then the style also depends on what you are
[Guest]: writing so the style will be geared to that and the language too will be geared
[Guest]: to that like if I'm writing the atmospheres say if I'm writing about a
[Guest]: Muslim family like my story which is called Bulbulaiya it's the labyrinth
[Guest]: which is set inside this it's in Banaras so it's a very old town and there's
[Guest]: this very old house in it and a very old woman living inside that house and
[Guest]: so the it's a whole thing of labyrinth various kinds of labyrinths like the
[Guest]: town itself is a labyrinth because of all those gullies and all those little
[Guest]: bylanes and you know it's a very complicated sort of map geographical map
[Guest]: of the city and the house which is also very old is about two or three hundred
[Guest]: years old this is actually my mother's home as it used to be and that is also a
[Guest]: very big house with many rooms many sort of courtyards and passages and it's
[Guest]: goes back it has a I've written about that too in the autobiographical essays
[Guest]: so it's that house and there's this old woman who is dwelling on her memories
[Guest]: so she's caught in the labyrinth of her memories so it's a very kind of
[Guest]: interactive sort of labyrinth which is town and house and old woman with her
[Guest]: years and so it I developed a style for writing that which is not a linear style
[Guest]: but it's like a shell I mean it goes around you know you she has she
[Guest]: remembers the past and then she's in the present so it's all structured like
[Guest]: that so the structure of a story and also the style the language is also
[Guest]: dictated by the material that's what I started out saying and in the meantime
[Guest]: I've forgotten your question I've also forgotten it because I got lost
[Amit Varma]: in my answer so let me move on to kind of quoting you on the writing process
[Amit Varma]: because this was such a lovely passage and I think all my listeners will really
[Amit Varma]: enjoy it again from your essay where you wrote quote it took me a long time to
[Amit Varma]: realize that the process of writing begins much before one has put anything
[Amit Varma]: down that one has so to speak always been writing it was while chasing
[Amit Varma]: butterflies in the garden as a child or watching a tortoise shell cat slink away
[Amit Varma]: into a dark alley that the writing has taken place like an invisible letter
[Amit Varma]: written with lime juice that only shows up when a hot iron is put to it the
[Amit Varma]: impressions that have been written onto the memory all the while that life is
[Amit Varma]: being lived are revealed in the catalyzing moment where pen meets paper
[Amit Varma]: the city buried underground and long forgotten about is chanced upon and not
[Amit Varma]: without a shock or surprise so it was that years after the house of my
[Amit Varma]: childhood had slipped into oblivion I found myself writing stop quote and I'm
[Amit Varma]: fascinated by what you also said about the act of translation because the act
[Amit Varma]: of translation is obviously an act of creation itself because in one sense you
[Amit Varma]: know any language must be impossible to actually translate into another like you
[Amit Varma]: said of Urdu so while translating did it help that you were looking closely at
[Amit Varma]: both the languages the language that you're translating from and the language
[Amit Varma]: that you're translating into I would imagine that that act of mindfully
[Amit Varma]: looking at each sentence and figuring out how to get something across that act
[Amit Varma]: of mindfulness itself shapes your own writing and then does that to take a
[Amit Varma]: step further shape the way that you look at the world around you you know like if
[Amit Varma]: you see Proust for example going into these deep observations and just going
[Amit Varma]: you know does that sort of shape the next time that you are going into your
[Amit Varma]: description of a particular thing do you feel that translation therefore played
[Amit Varma]: an important part in helping you find your voice as it were.
[Guest]: Well actually to put it in a very broad sense I think even when you're writing
[Guest]: your own fiction you're translating because you have seen the world and
[Guest]: seeing the world and absorbing it is itself an act of translation I mean you
[Guest]: are seeing visuals around you you're not seeing it in words but to put that world
[Guest]: in words is already an act of translation so in that sense a fiction writer is
[Guest]: always a translator and that can be said for any medium of art I suppose I mean
[Guest]: poetry or fiction or whatever you know it's the same thing I mean you're seeing
[Guest]: something and you're in your head the pictures are being formed into words and
[Guest]: those words are then formed into sentences and then you are sort of
[Guest]: working on those sentences and even those sentences when you are translating
[Guest]: them into say English then your English is also going to be changed by the way
[Guest]: you have been brought up the kind of social class that you belong to where you
[Guest]: have grown up the regional and the cultural parameters of that would affect
[Guest]: the way you write English also so there are many factors that go into it and it's
[Guest]: a constant process of the which is ongoing you know you there's nothing
[Guest]: that you can say I look at this sentence and I think I wonder how to translate it
[Guest]: it's not like that really for me I mean a translator has to look beyond the text
[Guest]: you know you have to sort of absorb the text that you have read and then you have
[Guest]: to because very often a sentence to sentence translation will absolutely not work
[Guest]: so you have to get somehow creatively transmit what you have read and even if
[Guest]: it's not exactly what you read it's a kind of you know distillation of what you
[Guest]: have found in the originary text and you are going to describe it in your own words
[Guest]: so so I think translation is more and more a thing of absorption you have to
[Guest]: absorb it in a particular way and you have to get a sense of the language that
[Guest]: you're translating from and the language you're translating into because the
[Guest]: the way both languages are structured is very different so one thing may work in
[Guest]: this language and it may not work in the other language you know so it's you just
[Guest]: have to have a kind of I suppose you have to look at it in a particular way to be
[Guest]: able to get it right or there's no question of right or wrong but I mean to
[Guest]: make it work I mean it has to you there are many factors that are at work
[Amit Varma]: also you know earlier you spoke about how literature is so sort of dependent on
[Amit Varma]: the context of the times and the circumstances and all that and somewhere
[Amit Varma]: you've written about how just being a woman closed you off to a set of
[Amit Varma]: experiences like you can't go walking the streets of your city yet after
[Amit Varma]: midnight and you know there are certain experiences you just won't have that if
[Amit Varma]: you go to a panwala and you're just hanging out everyone else is conscious
[Amit Varma]: that there's a woman there and therefore they are behaving differently so there
[Amit Varma]: is a limit to what experiences are open to you how has your sort of way of seeing
[Amit Varma]: the world evolved over a period of time in the sense that just speaking as a man
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that there is a layer of social interaction that was completely
[Amit Varma]: invisible to me till a few years ago which is really that extra layer of
[Amit Varma]: awareness that women have to carry with them you know as a man like I can go out
[Amit Varma]: walking after midnight I can enter a lift with five other people and not think
[Amit Varma]: for a moment about who they are you know whereas women have to carry this kind of
[Amit Varma]: extra layer of them and just becoming aware of that layer then just opens one
[Amit Varma]: out to more kind of complexity now it seems from your writing that you're very
[Amit Varma]: self-reflective right so there's nothing in that sense there aren't so many
[Amit Varma]: unknown unknowns there might be known unknowns like what is a city like at
[Amit Varma]: night but they aren't unknown unknowns like there was for me when I didn't
[Unknown]: realize that people had this other layer of awareness they had to go through so
[Amit Varma]: how has your gaze your way of looking at the world in all its aspects you know
[Amit Varma]: not just from the point of view of gender but just how has your gaze overall
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the world changed through your life and I ask this not just in a
[Amit Varma]: writerly context of the things you write but just as a person in general I think
[Guest]: women in general do carry a lot of baggage that men don't carry but then men
[Guest]: also carry some baggage that women don't so I don't know whether we can sort of
[Guest]: draw some kind of thing there but women I think live with a lot of anxiety I mean
[Guest]: if you're traveling on a bus for instance you're traveling on a train you
[Guest]: constantly have to be aware of who the next person is why that person is that
[Guest]: person looking at you where they tend to especially in a bus in a crowded bus I
[Guest]: have experienced I don't think there'd be any woman possibly who has traveled on
[Guest]: an Indian bus and not been groped or not been you know sort of so that kind of
[Guest]: experience will never be a man's experience or never be or sometimes it
[Guest]: could be a man's experience too but I mean it's it's the norm for women so
[Guest]: it's that kind of anxiety plus there's so many other anxieties or even as a
[Guest]: writerly person I mean if you're trying to write there are so many things that
[Guest]: crowd your mind even if you say get four hours a day or that's that's luxury but
[Guest]: say two hours a day but your mind has to be empty for you to be able to write but
[Guest]: the woman will often have the kitchen or the children or something else like that
[Guest]: domestic worries on her mind whereas a man I think from my sense of it if a man
[Guest]: gets a two or three hours then the mind can be free of many other things unless
[Guest]: of course there are other worries that other worries in the world that you are
[Guest]: worried about or your bank staff or something else you know which you are
[Guest]: worrying about but otherwise these domestic worries are not a man's worry
[Guest]: as such you know you are and then people say we did get that much time but do
[Guest]: somehow that my mind space has always been crowded by other things so in many
[Guest]: ways women do have a much more difficult time of it especially you were trying to
[Guest]: do something like writing which needs hours and hours and hours of time and you
[Guest]: may not produce a single line at the end of it you know people will not understand
[Guest]: that you spend so much time and what were you doing all this while if you
[Guest]: didn't write you know that's the normal question so but that of course is the
[Guest]: same for both men and women but I mean women will often have this worry about
[Guest]: you know other things on their minds when even when they are writing and one
[Amit Varma]: of the things writers do is just using the power of imagination they can
[Amit Varma]: obviously come out of their own skin get into someone else's skin transmit that
[Amit Varma]: to the reader and the reader experiences herself in a different way because that
[Amit Varma]: has happened and I noticed this particularly how well you've done this
[Amit Varma]: in your story Other Skies which you published in Patalipi which you
[Amit Varma]: translated your own story basically so I've obviously read it in English where
[Amit Varma]: the character is a guy called Altaf Ahmed and I was very struck by this bit where
[Amit Varma]: it's after 2001 the riots have happened in Gujarat he's far away from that but
[Amit Varma]: you capture his interior life so well where you talk about how he sees a woman
[Amit Varma]: in a burqa and he starts thinking about how long it would take for the burqa to
[Amit Varma]: burn or when he sort of when somebody asks him his name he stammers while
[Amit Varma]: telling his name because he is so aware of it and I absolutely love that story
[Amit Varma]: because it started off with this stark interior life of this guy and then went
[Amit Varma]: into this really magical place and I won't give a spoiler alert but there were
[Amit Varma]: these sort of two sort of introductions of magic within the story we just took it
[Amit Varma]: to another different level and in some ways I mean I was also going to saving a
[Amit Varma]: question for later about whether you've read Murakami because it seemed almost
[Amit Varma]: Murakami-esque what you did with that story but to get first get back to the
[Amit Varma]: question where you've entered this character's head these are not thoughts
[Amit Varma]: you would have had you would never have had to stammer while saying your name
[Unknown]: you would not have wondered about how long it takes a burqa to burn
[Amit Varma]: yeah you know so what is that process then like of you know being able to do
[Amit Varma]: something like this of widening your gaze like this is it something that came
[Amit Varma]: to you with age is this something you would have been able to do at 20 or is
[Amit Varma]: it the Therav of being a little older and
[Guest]: hmm well yes you are you're right I mean I do get into the character but I mean
[Guest]: this is something I mean I don't know if it's particular to me I think everyone
[Guest]: was every writer yeah I mean not just writer I mean that that was a time when
[Guest]: this was very much a topic of conversation everywhere people were
[Guest]: discussing the Gujarat riot and what happened and you know this so-and-so
[Guest]: happened this this is what somebody felt on the train this is what somebody
[Guest]: walking down the road experienced you know so constantly there was talk in the
[Guest]: air of this thing so I mean it was not very difficult actually to get into that
[Guest]: person's shoes I mean after all I mean what would a person with a Muslim name
[Guest]: at that time be thinking you know there's a great anxiety around and there's fear
[Guest]: spilling or you know out of every Muslim home every person and but since then I
[Guest]: have changed my view a little I mean now of course it might be more true but at
[Guest]: that point I mean they were like we went out and you often met Muslims who were
[Guest]: not anxious at all or possibly because they had not been aware of what was going
[Guest]: on they had not heard they were in UP and this is something happening Gujarat
[Guest]: I don't know but people were saying their names people were happily sort of doing
[Guest]: going about their jobs so it wasn't as if everyone was nervous but I think the
[Guest]: people around us people in the middle class that gets to hear of these things
[Guest]: much more we were nervous we used to think like this and once you are thinking
[Guest]: in such terms in then it's not difficult to get into at least I think it's not
[Guest]: difficult to get into such a person's shoes I mean there's another story which
[Guest]: I thought might be more difficult to get into there's a story that I wrote which
[Guest]: is now going to be part of my new collection that's about to be out the
[Guest]: proofs have arrived and I have not been able to look at them because I'm here
[Guest]: so anyway there's this story I wrote called Mujrim Farar which is about a
[Guest]: rapist and it's from it's written in the rapist voice you know and I broadly I
[Guest]: was reacting to I read reports of the rape that took place in the Shakti Mills
[Guest]: in Bombay and it kind of set off something in me you know what happens
[Guest]: what goes on in a person who's done this heinous crime what does such a person
[Guest]: think so I tried to look at it from his point of view and to give it his voice
[Guest]: so it's basically written like that I mean I shouldn't again give spoilers but
[Guest]: it's he is following and if the whole act of raping that girl is described and
[Guest]: I've given him a certain language which is a part of UP speak and a part of
[Guest]: Bombay lingo you know the filmy Bollywood lingo rather the languages
[Guest]: language that he's probably absorbed from watching films so it's from his
[Guest]: point of view and how he does this act and then he runs away and you know I
[Guest]: shouldn't tell you the whole story but basically it's trying to inhabit a rapist
[Guest]: shoes so that's and I'm trying to give it some kind I mean I'm giving it a I
[Guest]: mean it's a story of protest basically let me put it in a very wide sort of
[Guest]: sense so it's that and the other stories I've written which are also about
[Guest]: characters I mean somebody once asked me do you think of yourself as a political
[Guest]: writer so actually I don't I don't think of myself as an overtly political
[Guest]: writer but I mean if you're writing about things around you which are happening
[Guest]: everything is political that goes on in this country but it's also experienced
[Guest]: through your own persona which and I think I'm not sure I approve of the
[Guest]: completely statement political statement type stories you know because I think
[Guest]: there are two different kinds of stories one is of course when you are trying to
[Guest]: comment on what's going on around you and sort of pick up some incident that's
[Guest]: happened or some movement that's going on and you write about it in a kind of
[Guest]: expository sort of style and there's the other thing in which you leave yourself
[Guest]: empty and you absorb impressions and somehow your writer's voice comes out it
[Guest]: is not your conscious voice it's something else that has been happening
[Guest]: inside you and there's a certain logic to that writing that is not trying to
[Guest]: make a comment on what's going on it's not a statement it's not so I have
[Guest]: tended more to the second style of writing but because I live in a certain
[Guest]: environment then obviously what I'm writing will be political because I'm
[Guest]: absorbing things from around and how can you not be political in Indian
[Guest]: environment so it's like that so inhabiting shoes a writer has to inhabit
[Guest]: someone else's shoes how will you write you can't write just about yourself you
[Amit Varma]: have to write about someone else which sort of brings me to this modern kind of
[Amit Varma]: dilemma about the how the environment around us is changing in terms of how
[Amit Varma]: people receive writing like I completely agree with you a writer has to occupy
[Amit Varma]: other people's heads wear other people's shoes I mean that's a whole that's a
[Amit Varma]: whole game but at the same time you have people talk about things like cultural
[Amit Varma]: appropriation and so on and I can totally imagine somebody criticizing you
[Amit Varma]: daring to put yourself in the head of someone called Altaf Ahmed and saying
[Amit Varma]: that that's appropriation you know seed the platform and all of that and and
[Amit Varma]: that's just one sort of political aspect that kind of comes into commentary on
[Amit Varma]: literature but I see other commentary on literature also come from political
[Amit Varma]: places like that you know you're showing you're showing male toxicity and blah
[Amit Varma]: blah blah as if you know I mean characters have to be real the world is
[Amit Varma]: what it is you know that's it's our job to kind of write about that so what do
[Amit Varma]: you think about this kind of strident politics which is so often even
[Amit Varma]: evaluating literature through a political lens rather than just seeing a book for
[Guest]: what it is yeah I mean I have my problems with it frankly because what I
[Guest]: mean what does cultural appropriation even mean I mean if you're going to
[Guest]: write about some something anything any person who is not yourself then it's
[Guest]: cultural appropriation isn't it who will you write about at the end of the day
[Guest]: you will come down to yourself and you're only allowed to write about yourself and
[Guest]: even that is not one self one as we know we contain many people inside
[Guest]: ourselves too so that too is appropriation then so where does this
[Guest]: argument lead so it just seems to me a very very flawed kind of thing and it's
[Guest]: a it's basically a political argument it's not a literary argument at all
[Guest]: because literature means other people how can you write literature without
[Guest]: talking about other people it would be no literature then so and that's so much
[Amit Varma]: of literature is looked at through a political lens not just in the context
[Amit Varma]: of creation but other context yeah where you know only a woman of color is allowed
[Amit Varma]: to write about another woman of color and so on things like that do you feel
[Amit Varma]: that then people start approaching literature in the long way and in a
[Guest]: sense losing something losing out and all the richness that there is yeah
[Guest]: absolutely absolutely I agree with you entirely I mean of course we are losing
[Guest]: out and on this immense richness I mean how can you be how can who allows you
[Guest]: why should anyone allow you or not allow you I mean you are a free person you can
[Guest]: write what you like you know of course this whole hurt sentiments business is
[Guest]: there but I mean like Premchand was I mean now being castigated for using words
[Guest]: like chamar and you know using caste names which were just caste names simply
[Guest]: he's not using them in a derogatory sense but I mean there's this whole Dalit
[Guest]: movement going on against him that how dare he write how can he write about
[Guest]: people whom he is a high caste person so why is he writing about these people
[Guest]: how dare he write about our lives you know it's the same sort of thing which
[Guest]: goes on in other ways in other countries like blacks and you know the whole
[Guest]: rights movements they are all sort of related to that and as you pointed out
[Amit Varma]: in your essay on Premchand he actually wrote about them with great sympathy
[Unknown]: even making them out to be victims and some people would object to even that
[Guest]: as in why you show them as victims but yeah yeah so there's no end to it really
[Guest]: I mean the writer's job is to write and get on with it and rather than get stuck
[Guest]: in all these arguments I think wise words we'll take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break and then when we come back I have so much else left to discuss.
[Amit Varma]: Compounds at ctqcompounds.com which aims to help people up level themselves by
[Amit Varma]: reading more a few months ago I signed up for one of their programs called the
[Amit Varma]: daily reader every day for six months they sent me a long form article to read
[Amit Varma]: the subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models
[Amit Varma]: and marmalade this helped me build a habit of reading at the end of every day
[Amit Varma]: I understood the world a little better than I did before so if you want to
[Amit Varma]: build your reading habit head on over to ctq compounds and check out their daily
[Amit Varma]: reader new batches start every month they also have a great program called
[Amit Varma]: future stack which helps you stay up to date with ideas skills and mental models
[Amit Varma]: that will help you stay relevant in the future future stack batches start every
[Amit Varma]: Saturday also check out their social capital compound which helps you master
[Amit Varma]: social media what's more you get a discount of a whopping 2500 rupees
[Amit Varma]: 2500 if you use the discount code unseen so head on over to ctq compounds at ctq
[Amit Varma]: compounds.com and use the code unseen up level yourself welcome back to the scene
[Amit Varma]: welcome back to the scene.
[Amit Varma]: my question here really is that as a writer I think that there is sort of
[Amit Varma]: this dual imperative which pushes you in opposite directions and one imperative
[Amit Varma]: to you want your work to be read you want to be relevant and that might lead you towards
[Amit Varma]: changing your voice in a particular way to be more accessible that might lead you to picking
[Amit Varma]: subjects that are more in vogue so to say but the other part of that dual imperative is that you
[Amit Varma]: also just want to be true to yourself that there are things that you care about and whatever kind
[Amit Varma]: of comes out whatever you care the most about you want to write about that whether or not there are
[Amit Varma]: readers and and of course the danger of that is that it can be a path to self-indulgence
[Amit Varma]: if you you know especially if in terms of the style and the idiom you don't think of the reader
[Amit Varma]: at all and so these are kind of dual imperatives the danger on one side is that you lose yourself
[Amit Varma]: in the quest for finding more readers and the danger on the other side is that you become
[Amit Varma]: self-indulgent and no one can relate to you so is this something that you have kind of
[Guest]: thought about or yeah i mean yeah i've been asked this question before and i think it's uh
[Guest]: uh when one is actually writing one one doesn't have a reader in mind i i don't i mean it's
[Guest]: there's some kind of in critic inside you which is trying to get the writing to reach a certain
[Guest]: standard so you're writing following that voice your own voice and to see whether the story is
[Guest]: reaching where you wanted it to reach and the reader of course is important but the reader
[Guest]: comes in later you know so when you're at the point of writing if you started tailoring your
[Guest]: narrative to the reader then you'd really get nowhere because i mean there are so many readers
[Guest]: and they'd all be wanting different things so at the point of writing it really doesn't matter
[Guest]: and in fact if you think about a reader then it's usually there's two or three friends or
[Guest]: somebody who you know has read you or some you think what would they think you know sometime
[Guest]: but even that doesn't really enter at the point of writing and yes the other thing of course is
[Guest]: true i mean if you started tailoring your narrative then you have lost what you wanted to
[Guest]: write you know and the voice also can't you can't tailor the voice to the reader and the content
[Guest]: certainly not you know your content is i mean of course you may choose the language like you gave
[Guest]: the example of Premchand or my mothers i like to call them both mothers so they were writing and
[Guest]: they of course my my the fact that my father was also publishing kahaani at that time that may have
[Guest]: played a role in the choice of language too but then i mean this was a hindi literary scene that
[Guest]: they were aware of whereas i'm not sure that they knew about what was a comparable journal in urdu
[Guest]: for instance if they had wanted to publish there must have been but i don't know i mean i don't
[Guest]: know whether they knew of it also so it was wider dissemination ease of publication and for Premchand
[Guest]: of course uh it's true that he did it because it had a wider reach and he was wanting his message
[Guest]: to go to as many people as possible so in his case it was certainly true and in their case too
[Guest]: it was with a slight difference in the stress of it but yes it was true that they changed the
[Guest]: language but changing the language didn't mean that they changed the i mean the language was
[Guest]: the same it was a different script just the script was changed so it didn't really make
[Guest]: a difference whereas in Premchand of course the urdu versions and the hindi versions are completely
[Guest]: different and there's a whole in fact a lot of confusion about which work was written first
[Guest]: in urdu and which one because there are many of them which are both versions and you know so you
[Guest]: don't know which one in many cases you don't know which version was written first and which was
[Guest]: written second and there were also translations that he commissioned a commission or he got other
[Guest]: people to do commissioned is like a very modern word he didn't commission them in that sense but
[Guest]: i mean other people were also transcribing his stories from one language to the other so we
[Guest]: don't know which ones were done by him he himself had done something or somebody else had done it
[Guest]: and which one came first which one came second for often the versions are completely different
[Amit Varma]: like a lot of difference well tell me a little bit about like you often mentioned that you
[Amit Varma]: write in hindustani which i find is an important distinction now like you said at one level hindi
[Amit Varma]: and urdu are the same you know the same roots and everything at another level they are now different
[Amit Varma]: you know driven to that difference by forces of politics and so on and so forth so tell my
[Amit Varma]: listeners a little bit more about that i know both your uncle amritra and your cousin alokra
[Amit Varma]: have written books on this subject but you know just enlighten me a little bit more about what
[Amit Varma]: this process is because most people listening to this would think hindi and urdu are different
[Amit Varma]: languages and hindi is the language of the hindus of india and urdu is a language of people in
[Amit Varma]: pakistan and actually the thing is they are both the same language and that language itself which
[Amit Varma]: they were was a confluence of many many influences and sources from all over the place so yeah tell
[Guest]: me a little bit about this i don't know if i'll be able to tell you uh so very exactly about the
[Guest]: because alok has written a book on it and he would be absolutely the person you should talk
[Guest]: to about this but then of course politics has entered into it and hindi becomes you know for
[Guest]: reasons that we all know it starts to eliminate all the urdu words and in fact it's so difficult
[Guest]: to eliminate the urdu words from hindi because simple words like pani or you know stuff like
[Guest]: that you know very very basic words are you know urdu origin words so how can you sort of divorce
[Guest]: the two things but this process is going on in and it's tying in with the larger politics of
[Guest]: the country as the country is becoming sort of more and more hinduized let's call it the irony
[Guest]: of it is that urdu was actually called hindi first you know urdu was hindi i mean hindi meant urdu
[Guest]: and then later these names became i mean there's a whole history there so it's like i don't know
[Guest]: if i'm uh competent enough to speak on this kind of thing just now but i mean of course there's a
[Guest]: whole story behind it which perhaps if you have a look on your show one day you might be able to
[Amit Varma]: enlighten you okay that's the plan i'll get you to put in touch with him and i'll also link his
[Amit Varma]: book from the show notes for those who want more the interesting is like i read at the start of
[Amit Varma]: your uncle's book and samritra's book on this is that hindi was actually a general term used for
[Amit Varma]: people who lived in india so there is even like an old text which talks about how i think amir
[Amit Varma]: khusrow's text about how uh you know people under a certain emperor if hindus came to his attention
[Amit Varma]: they would they would be trampled by elephants but other hindis like the muslimans would be spared
[Unknown]: you know so it's interesting how words also evolve to take on particular meanings and
[Amit Varma]: people forget the origin and in fact so much of what we consider uh indian authentically indian
[Guest]: and sanskari today actually came from outside like yeah yeah like the elegant churidar kurtas
[Guest]: of modiji oh absolutely everything there's so much in the way of food in the way of dress i
[Guest]: mean everything i mean it's such a very mixed culture you know it's just impossible to separate
[Guest]: things into how can you do that i mean it's just complete bloody mindedness i think that these
[Guest]: people are trying to push this down people's throats before we get to talking more about your
[Amit Varma]: writing processes and all which also i do let's take this digression into how this country is
[Amit Varma]: kind of changing and in a sense your own family is a great example of a syncretic india this
[Amit Varma]: khichdi where everything is mixing easily of course you know premchand was progressive in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that he married a child widow his second wedding was to a very formidable lady
[Amit Varma]: and a writer in her own right who i'll ask you to speak about as well and so on down the line
[Amit Varma]: there have been mixed marriages as just you know in a sense your family reflects the khichdi that
[Amit Varma]: india is and yet today we live in a time where simplified narratives that sort of reduce our
[Amit Varma]: culture that reduce individuals to a particular thing are in vogue where you know hinduism is
[Amit Varma]: being reduced to sort of a particular brahminical strain of it you know or and in some ways almost
[Amit Varma]: carrying or almost sort of harking back to the tradition of other western religions which are
[Amit Varma]: religions of the book so to say and we of course don't have a book it's a completely open culture
[Amit Varma]: but there is a sense that you know uh you're trying to center around one of our great gods
[Amit Varma]: which is ram and you're trying to you know reduce it down to that and similarly in terms of language
[Amit Varma]: like a quick summary for readers who might not be aware of it is that the politicization of you know
[Amit Varma]: how language changed really began because there was a political movement to mark out hindi as
[Amit Varma]: separate from urdu and hindi in devanagari as a language of the hindus of india and for that one
[Amit Varma]: of the idioms kind of created was this very artificial sanskritized hindi shudh hindi as
[Amit Varma]: it were which i remember being taught in my school which no one actually speaks like like your own
[Amit Varma]: writing is much more the way everyday people speak the colloquial speak but there is this
[Amit Varma]: artificial kind of shudh hindi ness which has come up and the prime minister speaks in it
[Amit Varma]: which is very interesting because i don't know how people relate to that you know he's otherwise
[Amit Varma]: in terms of polemics and speech making and all for whatever it's worth you got to give him credit he
[Amit Varma]: does reach out to many people and he's built a cult around himself but i don't i don't understand
[Amit Varma]: how the language works because it's a language nobody really speaks but all that apart a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the change that is happening in our country uh in many alarming ways is something which people
[Amit Varma]: locate in the hindi heartland in up in the places where you live yeah tell me from your lived
[Amit Varma]: experiences of whether culturally uh the change is as drastic as it seems or it is only vocal
[Amit Varma]: elements of this current time and vocal elements of this political movement who make it seem that
[Guest]: way it's very much present i think it's just very present in your everyday lives i mean the sounds
[Guest]: around you have changed the way people walk has changed the way people laugh has changed i think
[Guest]: i mean this whole thing that's going on this hinduization let's call it i mean it's very very
[Guest]: present and especially uh in up because i mean and you can see even among the people who are
[Guest]: around you who were not sort of so very right-wing so i mean things have changed but now more people
[Guest]: you meet are sort of going to sort of be i mean you will be noticed much more as a kind of anomaly
[Guest]: in society rather than you know somebody who's part of a structure and when my parents got
[Guest]: married in 1948 i mean it was a hindu muslim marriage and this we are talking of the year
[Guest]: right after partition and there was nothing no furor made over it you know it happened
[Guest]: peacefully nobody noticed before that my uncle had also married a hindu wife and i mean then too
[Guest]: i mean it was not i mean like today there's this whole business of love jihad carrying on you know
[Guest]: i mean nobody thought of it like that earlier i mean it's just something very it's a political
[Guest]: thing that's being imposed on people's lives you know and it's impacting everyone i think in a very
[Guest]: very obvious in a very negative way so lots of people you meet i mean it's just the whole experience
[Amit Varma]: of living has changed in very drastic ways and and you you kind of mentioned about how you know
[Amit Varma]: love jihad wasn't a big deal then i did an episode on the gita press with akshay mukul
[Amit Varma]: and he's written a great book on it yeah and the interesting thing that i've discovered there is
[Amit Varma]: issue the issues like cow slaughter love jihad all these issues have really been coming down
[Amit Varma]: from decades since the 20s if not before they've been live political issues like either they were
[Amit Varma]: underground and they've only come over ground now or they were the fringe and they've become
[Amit Varma]: the mainstream now and i'm i don't know which one i'm more inclined to believe and of course
[Amit Varma]: these two are subtly different in the sense that underground and having coming over ground would
[Amit Varma]: mean that many people felt this but never actually said it or never expressed themselves and
[Amit Varma]: that expression has found its place now and politics has caught up with culture
[Amit Varma]: or that it it was a fringe belief these were fringe beliefs and fringe insecurities that have
[Amit Varma]: somehow spread so which of the two do you think there are because even i in my own life
[Amit Varma]: there are many people i have known for decades who i have to look at with new eyes because they
[Unknown]: are saying things and doing things that yeah exactly are surprising to me yeah and i'm sure
[Unknown]: the same has you know you've experienced the same as yeah everyone has so you know is it that they
[Amit Varma]: were like that all uh along or is it that something changed what happened this is something we talk
[Guest]: about all the time amit i mean i can't believe that this was the case always that all these
[Guest]: that all these feelings were buried and now they have suddenly you know come to the fore because
[Guest]: suddenly we have a hindu government in power it's not i don't think it's that so much it's probably
[Guest]: they are getting influenced by each other and also this whole thing of power i mean you know
[Guest]: the party in power and they tend to fall in line you people have this i think people especially
[Guest]: in india have a great thing for uh just being you know following like sort of herd mentality i mean
[Guest]: if someone is like that then they tend to be like that too you know so it's it's that and of course
[Guest]: everyone loves narendra modi that's for sure so they are following him so there's uh that i mean
[Guest]: i don't believe that they were like this always and even now in a common man if you see on the
[Guest]: street i mean if they pass uh even a masjid or they pass some kind of somebody's grave they will
[Guest]: bend their head i mean they will sort of bow down to it it's not as if they are all sort of very
[Guest]: kind of militant hindus or something they are hindus but they are not like that you know
[Guest]: so i i don't know how this quite this is how this is being transmitted but it's certainly taking i
[Guest]: mean the mind of people is definitely being changed you know the ways of looking at things
[Guest]: you know and they are possibly being shown the way they are being shown that look this is you
[Guest]: have this these people have been i mean a sense of hurt is being created where it was not it was
[Guest]: just everyone living peacefully together how did this suddenly start happening again it's very hard
[Guest]: to pinpoint and it's getting worse every day and i mean and people are not even like all these young
[Guest]: muslim boys being lynched why is there not more of an outcry or what is it you know i mean it's a
[Guest]: it's something that we see or even those poor boys in kashmir whose sort of eyes are being you know
[Guest]: you know all these pellets are being shot at them there's so much cruelty happening all around so
[Guest]: what is it what is it no and it just reminds me more and more of you know nazi era in germany
[Guest]: when i don't know if you've read this book called uh east west street i forget the name of the
[Guest]: writer well it's about uh this the laws that were made uh you know with all all the sort of war
[Guest]: you know laws that were made after the wars during the wars whatever sort of anti-jewish
[Guest]: lobby was sort of i mean they were trying to make laws to counteract those so in that book
[Guest]: there's this person there's a police person who's killing a jew on the street so this this guy i
[Guest]: forget i've forgotten all the names he comes up and he sees this policeman killing this jew so he
[Guest]: says why are you doing this i mean have you no soul so the man sort of does doesn't say anything
[Guest]: and he turns around he shoots the guy and he's also gone you know so it's just that people seem
[Guest]: to have no conscience left or conscience is too sort of asking for too much already i mean they
[Guest]: just have no sense maybe there's a certain blindness that has taken over different sort
[Guest]: of blindness because i think as a society we are pretty blind anyway i mean like the middle class
[Guest]: is completely blind to the poor person on the street we just don't see we just don't see what's
[Guest]: happening you know we have lost the capacity to stand in anyone else's shoes and we just can't
[Guest]: see that this person what kind of life would this person be leading you know we just we are
[Guest]: impervious to it completely we are looking at our own little feathering our own smallness and you
[Guest]: know not looking at anyone on the street so it's this is a different sort of blindness that we
[Amit Varma]: don't notice anyone else's pain yeah and that's so true like the name name of my show is of course
[Amit Varma]: a scene in the unseen but one way in which this plays out in our everyday lives is all the things
[Amit Varma]: we are blind to on a daily basis like you correctly said when i stop at a traffic signal yeah there
[Amit Varma]: might be someone outside my window but that person is invisible to me i'm in a different city yeah
[Amit Varma]: that person is in a different city yeah absolutely so i'm reminded of three kind of social science
[Amit Varma]: concepts which i'll quickly run through because hey why not digress and uh i'll ask you what you
[Amit Varma]: think of them and one of them comes from the social scientist cast sunstein he calls it group
[Amit Varma]: polarization so he did this very interesting experiment where he got a bunch of uh like i
[Amit Varma]: forget the exact ideologies in play but let's say a bunch of democrats and a bunch of republicans
[Amit Varma]: and he put the republicans together in a room for a kind of group discussion and he put the
[Amit Varma]: democrats together in a room and they took their views on certain subjects before the discussion
[Amit Varma]: and after the discussion and after it they found that after the discussion the entire opinion of
[Unknown]: the group became more extreme yeah so that the most moderate person in the group from the results
[Unknown]: before yeah was more extreme than the whole group had been uh you know um before the thing in in
[Amit Varma]: kind of both directions and he called this group polarization and perhaps there is a sense of this
[Amit Varma]: okay the the other one is um i i forget who the author is but in the early 20th century there was
[Amit Varma]: a study of lynching how lynching happens how crowds work how mobs work yeah and what that found was
[Amit Varma]: that there are different thresholds at which someone will lynch someone like the mechanism of
[Amit Varma]: lynching typically is this and a friend of mine who was lynched and lynched by the way doesn't
[Amit Varma]: mean killed it means beaten up by a crowd yeah so a friend of mine the journalist rishi majumdar
[Amit Varma]: was once lynched in that way and he lived to tell the tale uh thankfully and he described how it
[Unknown]: happened to him where he was somewhere in the heartland yeah and he was stuck in a group of
[Amit Varma]: people were arguing with him and it was just an argument and suddenly somebody who was not even
[Amit Varma]: part of the argument from the fringes came and slapped him and then one more guy came and slapped
[Unknown]: him and then eventually they all beat him up yeah and uh how it works is that everyone apparently
[Amit Varma]: has a threshold at which they start beating someone where a complete sociopath may just
[Amit Varma]: start hitting someone without anyone else another person will become violent himself if he sees five
[Amit Varma]: other people do it another person become violent if he sees a hundred other people do it so just
[Amit Varma]: thinking aloud it seems that maybe we've reached a chain of events where more and more thresholds
[Amit Varma]: are being reached so even someone who would otherwise have seemed moderate yeah is now
[Unknown]: getting carried away by the mob and the third phenomenon is something coined by the sociologist
[Amit Varma]: timur quran in his 1999 book private truths public lies which is preference falsification
[Amit Varma]: which is that there are certain views at a particular point in time which you keep to
[Amit Varma]: yourself because you feel it's not polite to say yeah like i'm you know if somebody feels a woman's
[Amit Varma]: place is in the kitchen he won't say it because he knows others will disapprove but if he finds 50
[Unknown]: other people say it then he'll feel emboldened to say that yes that is what our culture says yeah
[Amit Varma]: and that creates what quran called a preference cascade like an example he gave was in the soviet
[Amit Varma]: union where everybody living in the soviet union would feel that they were the only dissenters
[Unknown]: because nobody else was expressing but once enough people expressed that you had a preference cascade
[Amit Varma]: and it was almost overnight that the soviet union tumbled and i feel that social media
[Amit Varma]: created these preference cascades where you could have had a certain amount of innate bigotry within
[Amit Varma]: you where you might have felt resentment towards muslim men or you might have felt resentment
[Amit Varma]: towards whoever the other is and you don't say it because by and large everyone seems decent
[Unknown]: but then you have this kind of preference everybody's saying it and then you become like
[Amit Varma]: that and therefore my feeling is that it is not as if someone who is overtly a bigot today
[Amit Varma]: was a bigot yesterday or was not a bigot yesterday that bigotry was perhaps a small part of the
[Unknown]: multitudes he contains but that has now been amplified and given expression by this and
[Amit Varma]: everything that is being amplified today is the worst of us because that's what tends to get
[Guest]: yeah amplified so these are sort of my ramblings on this yeah i i agree with you i think uh there's
[Guest]: something something innate there is something innate which gets kind of uh you know it gets uh
[Guest]: the flame is fanned or whatever you know sort of and uh one person follows the other and then
[Guest]: that starts i mean if it's something that you think will can be justified and because there
[Guest]: are so many other people who feel the same way then perhaps it will be easier for you to express
[Guest]: that the the element of politeness as you said and they were too polite to express it that has
[Guest]: gone completely and now you feel that i will perhaps be praised for this very same thing
[Guest]: so they are i mean i think it does happen like that i mean i have often wondered at this in a
[Guest]: more general and a broader sense about the source of evil i mean like how uh if you if i see a
[Guest]: person walking on the road does that person hide in himself a murderer i mean that thought has
[Guest]: occurred to me that how do you make a normal person who's just leading a very ordinary life
[Guest]: living somewhere in a town and with his family why does that person where does that person suddenly
[Guest]: discover the seed of evil in him that he does this you know and but this is a very large moral
[Guest]: kind of question which i am not sure can be answered that easily and uh but it is something
[Guest]: like that there is in human nature something that you know that can be brought out and but it's very
[Guest]: hard to believe that so many people always believed you know that muslims are bad or whatever because
[Guest]: i mean after all if muslims had to sort of do this or convert people or whatever i mean they've been
[Guest]: in ruling for years and years hundreds of years and they didn't do it and we still survive as a
[Guest]: nation which is pretty much a multicultural i mean multi-religious nation up till now so
[Guest]: how can they believe this you know and that's just a bit of a puzzle for me maybe it's like
[Amit Varma]: schrodinger's india that both truths can be true like i remember i had the politician and thinker
[Amit Varma]: jp narayan on my show yeah and i put it to him that india was a deeply illiberal country and
[Amit Varma]: of course where i'm get our society is deeply illiberal and where i'm getting it from is the
[Amit Varma]: way women are treated and all the divisions cast all of that yeah and he said that he made an
[Amit Varma]: interesting point he said that that's true but if you look at it another way india can also be
[Amit Varma]: considered in this in its lived reality these are my words not his india can also be considered in
[Amit Varma]: its lived reality to be liberal because we are such a confluence of so many different you know
[Unknown]: experiences we have coexisted for so long we've been multi-religious for so long yeah as you said
[Amit Varma]: like thing i forget who it was gandhi or naipaul or churchill whatever one of them who said that
[Guest]: whatever you say of india the opposite is also true yeah yeah exactly so uh yes because we i mean
[Guest]: and also compared to some many other societies we are liberal still yeah i mean after all we
[Guest]: can get away with you know we can say some things and you know still get away with it
[Guest]: like you and i can have this conversation yeah yeah i mean so in other many other places this
[Guest]: would not be possible so i suppose in you know on a kind of relative sort of thing i mean we
[Guest]: perhaps would be called liberal but that is slowly slowly or very rapidly getting eroded yeah and we
[Guest]: are very fast becoming a nation of intolerant people you know i want to go back to your musing
[Amit Varma]: from a couple of moments ago where you said that you know when you pass a person on the road you
[Amit Varma]: wonder does that person carry the seed of a murderer uh inside himself and something that
[Amit Varma]: i've been thinking about for a long time is how uh the self is contingent and it's contingent on a
[Amit Varma]: series of accidents like the steven pinker once said nature gives us knobs nurture turns them and
[Unknown]: both are of course pure luck and accident you know the genes that we are born with and what
[Amit Varma]: circumstances do to us those circumstances even include things like the chemical composition of
[Amit Varma]: the brain for example like one of my favorite musicians chris cornell killed himself a couple
[Amit Varma]: of years ago and one of the possible reason was he was on some kind of medication which was later
[Amit Varma]: found to make people depressive and all of that so you change the chemical composition of it and
[Amit Varma]: the person completely changes and i am reminded about this by something you wrote in your beautiful
[Amit Varma]: essay in caravan where you wrote about your dad and i'll read this passage out but you're
[Amit Varma]: describing how your father met you in 1994 when he came from a train quote my father's hair was
[Amit Varma]: uncombed clean shaven all his life he now had a beard born of negligence his nails were long
[Amit Varma]: and yellow and a wilderness had taken over his eyes he had grown senile he would stand about in
[Amit Varma]: doorways having forgotten what he had come to the room for after my mother died he stood by her bed
[Amit Varma]: and looked at the quilt bunched upon it as if he suspected that she was underneath it never
[Amit Varma]: interested in food he developed a sweet tooth he ate the rasgullas that were bought for him from
[Amit Varma]: hira halwai with a focused pleasure he wiped his hand afterwards on his white dhoti this was a
[Amit Varma]: father i did not know stop quote and this really spoke to me because i have seen the same process
[Amit Varma]: in both of my parents who for different reasons became different people at the end of their lives
[Amit Varma]: people i almost could not recognize one in a not so good way and one in a good way and and it's
[Amit Varma]: something that often leads me to reflect on my own self that i feel so confident in who i am
[Amit Varma]: but it is all contingent something outside my control could completely change it and you know
[Amit Varma]: and as a writer this is sort of something that you've kind of commented on you know over here
[Guest]: what are your feelings on well actually yeah i mean i also have a story not quite like this but
[Guest]: it's also about a woman who sort of has a dementia like thing you know she becomes i mean it's
[Guest]: basically about these two friends who live next door to each other and they it's also about the
[Guest]: first period about this girl who gets the first menstrual period and the other girl who hasn't
[Guest]: yet got it so they interchange and you know all that and then this it's a description of a
[Guest]: friendship and then both of them go their separate ways this girl goes away to study somewhere the
[Guest]: other one remains behind in the town and then when they meet again she sees this other girl
[Guest]: who has the period and this one who hasn't she sees her getting off a rickshaw and she recognizes
[Guest]: her and she says oh i know you but i have now i have difficulty recognizing people because it's
[Guest]: something that has happened and i can think of things i can remember things that happen a very
[Guest]: long time ago but i can't remember things that happened say yesterday so she's basically in this
[Guest]: kind of state she's got this dementia and it carries on so they meet after very long periods
[Guest]: and the next time they meet is this girl's the dementia girl's brother has died and this other
[Guest]: one goes to see the i mean for condolence and she sees this girl and she's oh yeah i forgot the
[Guest]: very crucial thing of it that when she this girl has a first period and she tells her friend about
[Guest]: it and she says no don't tell my mother because i went and touched the statues of the gods while i
[Guest]: was impure and she would be upset if you told her so don't tell her that and then at this now 40
[Guest]: years have passed 50 years have passed and this girl is with dementia she doesn't remember anything
[Guest]: but she says let me take you to my mother and she'll be very happy to see you and she's just
[Guest]: lost her son and whatever she'll be consoled when she sees you but and she says in a lower voice
[Guest]: don't tell her about that you know she remembers that day that has now finished and it's all gone
[Guest]: everything is finished around her but that day is still crystal clear in her memory she just
[Guest]: it's nothing of it has changed it has stayed with her all these years and she just that's the one
[Guest]: thing about the friendship that she remembers so of course this girl meets the mother and she
[Guest]: doesn't tell her anything all that and then she goes away and she never goes back again so that's
[Guest]: where the story ends so this is also sort of dementia comes into that story too so it's about
[Guest]: well people do change and i think it's not just chemicals i mean not drugs or anything that change
[Guest]: the wiring in your brain sometimes it's just circumstance and sometimes people have that
[Guest]: condition there's so many conditions you know you can become bipolar you can become you know some
[Guest]: kind of other alzheimer's or whatever you know and the composition of your brain has changed in the
[Guest]: meantime so you don't know what has caused this to happen so yes it is we become different people
[Guest]: throughout our lives i suppose we keep changing and by the end of it we probably wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: recognize that earlier person who we were so what do you think of the earlier Sarah Rai the person
[Amit Varma]: in her 20s like you know when i look back on the younger me i am kind of filled with astonishment
[Amit Varma]: that that person managed to become this older me i mean i just don't like him at all it's like
[Unknown]: another person i'm like what and then you begin to kind of question your sense of self and say
[Amit Varma]: that what is it that that person and i have in common apart from the name and apart from all
[Guest]: that and yeah have you reflected on your younger self well at that point of what i do think is that
[Guest]: one was not thinking of anything at all one was just going through life just as as the days came
[Guest]: you just lived it and you went on so there was no process of thinking really about where i'm headed
[Guest]: what should i be doing there was no kind of conceptual framing of a life at that stage
[Guest]: you know and now i regret it almost that i should have done this i should have done that why didn't
[Guest]: i read this why didn't i write that why didn't i start my writing career much earlier all the
[Guest]: all those regrets i do have but then one was leading you had all the time in the world
[Guest]: now i feel that time is finishing i have to do what i have there's a kind of urgency that has
[Guest]: taken over my life you know and then one didn't think of it i mean it was just a whole life
[Guest]: stretching ahead in front of you and you could do what with it what you liked so most of it was
[Guest]: spent just going out with friends or reading or listening to music or whatever i mean there was
[Guest]: no direction as such but i don't know how this whole direction business came in in the first
[Guest]: place because well i was not as such i mean i wanted to be a writer but i was not really doing
[Guest]: anything about it you know i was not going about it with any kind of seriousness but suddenly i
[Guest]: mean it did take me by surprise i suppose that i wrote my first story i was in australia then
[Guest]: and we were there my husband was doing his research there so we were there for about six years
[Guest]: and i wrote my first story there it was already quite late i mean i was in my 30s not 40s but 30s
[Guest]: 40s but 30s and i sent my stories to my father who at that point was quite all right i mean he
[Guest]: didn't have this dementia thing that i spoke of later and so he read my stories he liked them
[Guest]: he sort of he felt sort of happy that somebody had taken after you know whatever somebody was
[Guest]: also writing in the family in among this generation so all that did take place but
[Guest]: i mean if i had to live it all again which of course i won't i would have started this much
[Guest]: earlier and i just feel a sense of waste of a wasted life in a sense that you come to things
[Guest]: very late and then when you realize there's so little left it's that sadness of it takes
[Amit Varma]: i had a episode i really like doing with kavita rao who's written a wonderful books on our lady
[Amit Varma]: doctors and we spoke a lot about late blooming there and like her mother started learning sitar
[Amit Varma]: at 75 and now at 77 she apparently plays it very well and i remembered you know penelope
[Unknown]: fitzgerald the great novelist who started writing in her 60s and mother booker and all that and just
[Amit Varma]: lovely novels so here's the thing you know you start your essay in caravan by talking about how
[Amit Varma]: your dad when he met you uh you know made made you sit down and you're already around 40 at this time
[Unknown]: or thereabouts and made you write uh the following words quote katharine mansfield you will be the
[Amit Varma]: katharine mansfield of india stop quote and what strikes me here is that he has a vision for you
[Amit Varma]: he wants you to be this and this is somehow important and equally in your words when you
[Amit Varma]: talk about starting too late or feeling that there is not enough time there is sort of the
[Amit Varma]: implication that you have set out for yourself something to do or something to achieve and you
[Amit Varma]: know and i also have those regrets sometimes that oh i could have written 10 books by now i never
[Amit Varma]: had this and all of that but also i tell myself that it is sometimes dangerous to have that one
[Amit Varma]: vision of yourself or those big dreams because they never happen what is more important is to
[Amit Varma]: keep doing what you love doing and whatever happens happens and you live in the moment
[Amit Varma]: and when you're gone you're gone anyway you know this whole concept of a legacy i don't know what
[Amit Varma]: it means so what do you think about that especially you know given the pressure of the sort of family
[Amit Varma]: you came from and if you also then think of yourself as a writer there might be the sense
[Amit Varma]: that oh i have to become x y z and even now when you speak of uh you know not enough time which i
[Guest]: don't agree with there is enough time for all of us and too little time for all of us in another
[Guest]: respect but how do you actually actually i mean i think the struggle was not to become someone
[Guest]: like i mean it was not an i mean not ambitious in that sense but a desire to have a better utilized
[Guest]: life you know not to have wasted so much you know because there's so much that one doesn't know so
[Guest]: little one has read so much of other systems of knowledge that one is completely oblivious to i
[Guest]: mean you just what do we know of you know sort of muslim learning or even sanskrit or you know
[Guest]: there's so many vast sort of areas of knowledge that are completely sort of dark for me you know
[Guest]: so i just wish that i had done more with that time and one doesn't get the urgency at that point of
[Guest]: time because one thinks that one has all the time and you're not even thinking along those lines
[Guest]: you're not thinking that i should be doing this or i wish i knew this so uh it was not so much of
[Guest]: of wanting to become or having written 10 books or whatever but a kind of engagement with life
[Guest]: that could have become begun earlier and that started late for me i thought in a certain kind
[Guest]: of way of thinking that i could have got into earlier and i did think and well it was a little
[Guest]: all over the place i thought i mean i it could have been more focused so if you had to give
[Amit Varma]: advice to your younger self in specific terms what would that be right every day
[Unknown]: because writing also sharpens the vision you see it's not just what you're producing but
[Guest]: you're learning to see you know seeing is so important is such an important part of being a
[Amit Varma]: writer i couldn't agree more this is almost like a sort of a lament i share about myself
[Unknown]: so let's actually now talk about your sort of your writing process yeah when you begin writing
[Amit Varma]: seriously like my biggest problem is that you know if there is a structure to something i'm
[Amit Varma]: doing for example with the scene in the unseen i know that i have to release it on monday
[Amit Varma]: and therefore i have to get the files ready by so and so time yeah and i'm there's a structure so i
[Amit Varma]: get it done but when there isn't a structure like i want to write a book or i want to do this it's
[Amit Varma]: very hard for me to be able to discipline myself because in the moment there is always something
[Amit Varma]: that is in the way so how have you arrived at your sort of writing discipline and writing habits
[Guest]: and what are your sort of processes like well uh i suppose it means that you spend a lot of time
[Guest]: at the job and say if one can manage to while i'm in the process of actually writing the story then
[Guest]: i do spend time with it i mean i can never rush through a story i mean and i never make drafts
[Guest]: it's like when i'm working on a story i keep changing it as i go along and this this used
[Guest]: to be a problem when i wrote longhand because then you have to cut and slash and copy out the
[Guest]: whole thing again which for much of my earlier writing life i did have these registers full of
[Guest]: stories and i would cancel them out and rewrite them and all that but this has changed of course
[Guest]: with the coming of the computer but you do spend a lot of time thinking and thinking and polishing
[Guest]: and the thought and integrating what you're trying to say with the language with the structure
[Guest]: i mean i also tend to use metaphors sometimes like the whole story might be a metaphor for
[Guest]: instance there's this story that i wrote called Amar Vallari which is about losing which about
[Guest]: losing things like and lost spaces it's about lost spaces really i mean about a space that and a
[Guest]: space can be a metaphor you know it can be in the story it is a metaphor it's a space of childhood
[Guest]: of memory of of an actual physical space which is now being like it's set in a bungalow which is
[Guest]: very much like my own bungalow which is all wild and it has gone and it's in the middle of this
[Guest]: residential sort of high-rise apartments around it and now it's just this one space of wildness left
[Guest]: so it's that and wildness i've been kind of obsessed with wildness a little bit in my writing
[Guest]: and wildness not just as physical wildness but as a metaphor also like wildness in the sense of
[Guest]: solitude like there's a story i wrote called Biaban Mei which is in the wilderness literally
[Guest]: so in that you can be in a sort of mental wilderness i mean there's a little girl in it
[Guest]: who's sort of dumb you've read that story i love that story yes and so i mean wildness has been
[Guest]: kind of occupied me a lot and i and it has never been a negative thing it i think it's a space of
[Guest]: solitude that one needs and which is very necessary especially for a writer and in solitude it is in
[Guest]: solitude only that the thought will come to you the idea will come to you and you will be able to
[Guest]: to see you know a certain clarity comes when you're alone and you're in solitude so for me
[Guest]: the wildness and solitude has become like together it have got merged together as an idea and i think
[Guest]: it's very necessary for a writer so that has happened and what was i saying i mean i've
[Guest]: forgotten this how we started out yeah no we were just sort of talking about your processes of
[Guest]: writing yeah so it's the solitude and you need to be completely by yourself you need to empty your
[Guest]: mind there should not be anything else happening around you which is always a very difficult thing
[Guest]: because something or the other is always happening so it's very hard to just do that but then you
[Guest]: have to empty yourself out and allow the voice to take shape you know so it often you just sit
[Guest]: for hours and hours and nothing comes so at the end of a day if you come up with a paragraph that's
[Guest]: a good day you know and sometimes nothing may come at all and that's a bad day so it's basically
[Guest]: it's just that i mean you keep thinking and meditating and you know just waiting for the
[Amit Varma]: thing to arrive i love wilderness i wanted to talk about it i don't have a particular question
[Amit Varma]: as such but what i loved about wilderness was again in in a magic realist kind of sense that
[Amit Varma]: moment at the end which just kind of transcends the story and just is so so profound and how do
[Amit Varma]: you arrive at that in the sense of not in the mechanistic sense of how did you think of this
[Amit Varma]: but more in a sense of in terms of process like did you have to write different drafts of the
[Amit Varma]: story or were you stuck at that point how do i take it forward or when you begin the story do
[Amit Varma]: you know the way it's going to end and you just know what's going to happen and it's not just
[Amit Varma]: that story it's also other uh skies for example where that that crazy end which is again right
[Unknown]: out of magic realism and it's such a striking image like imagine a cinematic image like that
[Amit Varma]: and i don't want to give any spoilers but my listeners we can read those themselves
[Amit Varma]: so how does that happen and is it then also a conscious process that you think about how in
[Amit Varma]: every story you want to find this moment which kind of crystallizes everything which is like
[Guest]: this revelatory moment which is it's a bit of a mystery actually because it comes sort of in a
[Guest]: flash i mean it is not something i mean when i start writing there's no story as such that i have
[Guest]: in my head the story as it happens you know it just takes over when you are writing the story
[Guest]: you know shapes itself one sentence follows the other and somehow you know the story gets created
[Guest]: i'm also not very sure how exactly it happens it's a sort of accident i suppose and but that
[Guest]: ending that you're talking of that did come to me in a flash i mean these there are these two people
[Guest]: who are locked into the wildernesses of different kinds and suddenly what can unite them and get
[Guest]: them out of it is this bus that's totally instead of moving forward it starts rising because they
[Guest]: also see themselves at that point they see themselves they see the whole town especially
[Guest]: for the writer who is not for the little girl but the writer who must see around her so when
[Guest]: she's up there she can see everything very clearly and she also finds that she has got some kind of
[Guest]: release from this being locked as she thinks you know she's got a writer's block so that block
[Guest]: gets removed for her too and maybe presumably now she'll be able to write so it's all about
[Guest]: the writing process too that story is about the girl and it's also about the writer's own writing
[Guest]: process so it happened like that and then the other story i mean i don't really have many magical
[Guest]: moments as such in the stories in my stories maybe just the two i've read just the two and
[Guest]: maybe a couple more i mean i don't quite know how they how they enter the story like
[Guest]: there's another story i wrote which is called Kam Bolne Wale Bhai which is set in Chhattisgarh
[Guest]: and it's got in the backdrop some mysterious happenings that are taking place we know what
[Guest]: they are you know and the sort of people getting killed and all that but at the end also there's
[Guest]: a moment in which this person i mean i shouldn't tell you this story don't tell me don't give the
[Guest]: spoiler yeah yeah but anyway there's this moment in which all these Jugnus suddenly become it's
[Guest]: like a sheet of Jugnus and they are they are signaling hope i mean there's also this sort
[Guest]: of symbolism tied in with some of the stories in which a certain description will add up to hope
[Guest]: or will add up to something that's not consciously done but i find that it happens it becomes like
[Guest]: that when i'm writing the story that i'm kind of in a very subtle way giving a message so it's not
[Guest]: really a message as such but it's tied in with the story but it does lead you to some kind of hopeful
[Amit Varma]: ending and how consciously do you think about technique or craft number one and a second
[Amit Varma]: question kind of tied into this which is what i have recently been wondering whether art and craft
[Amit Varma]: are really the same thing that art is just craft except it is craft at a subconscious level so
[Amit Varma]: you're doing something without knowing how you did it but it is really craft you've gotten to that
[Unknown]: point because you've done something again and again and it seems magical and beautiful and it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't seem like there is it seems to transcend craft which almost has a mundane implication
[Amit Varma]: but actually they are the same thing and one of them you understand and you can break it down
[Amit Varma]: and the other one is happening at a subterranean level yeah well in some ways uh you're right i
[Guest]: mean uh one is of course i mean craft is very important in the writing of a story and sometimes
[Guest]: the story is dictated by the craft also so uh i mean the two things are obviously very tied together
[Guest]: but uh when the craft and art they are separate too i mean i mean there you firstly i think what
[Guest]: differentiates it is that there has to be an idea behind the art there has to be something there
[Guest]: it's not just the making of patterns or a making of and there has to be something central to the
[Guest]: narrative something integrated there has to be some kind of vision some kind of vision to the
[Guest]: story and for that vision you choose the appropriate craft you choose the narrative style you choose
[Guest]: the structure you choose the language everything falls in with that central vision so if that
[Guest]: central vision is missing then i don't think it can be possibly be called art then it becomes just a
[Guest]: random pattern finely drawn but it's a pattern so i think that is the main thing that is different
[Amit Varma]: and when you kind of look at the books that you've written uh and obviously a couple of
[Amit Varma]: decades have passed since uh you know you kind of resumed uh writing in that sense after Lucky
[Amit Varma]: Horace what do you think of your earlier books do you look back and you think that oh you know
[Amit Varma]: i wish i could do it better or oh i really love it it captured that moment what where i was at that
[Amit Varma]: moment or do you think that oh another person wrote it it wasn't me i am now somebody else
[Guest]: how do you look at your past work and you know there's some of it i hate yeah i do hate some of
[Guest]: it uh but i can see why i wrote it at that point and i can see the flaws but there are some things
[Guest]: that i wrote that i like even now and i think oh that's that did i really write that you know that
[Guest]: kind of feeling but i mean like what are those well there's one story i wrote which was very
[Guest]: close to me in my heart because it was actually something that happened and i was kind of uh
[Guest]: uh changing it for the fiction but it did happen and it it was a story which of my i mean my
[Guest]: collection is called that it's called Ababil Ki Udaan which is the flight of the swallow so it's
[Guest]: about death and it's about superstition so this uh i mean it's about this little girl and it
[Guest]: actually happened to me but obviously in a story changes but the death of her brother for instance
[Guest]: so it's uh in the story the brother dies and she's somehow uh how can i say this without
[Guest]: revealing the whole story i mean she's uh thinking about death and all these sort of
[Guest]: things that come in all these little details that come in she's lying on the lawn and this brother
[Guest]: she she comes running on the lawn and the brother is lying on the lawn and she jumps over him and
[Guest]: she thinks it's about superstition so she's been told that if you jump over a person who's lying
[Guest]: there that person stops growing so she has this thing that she's killed her brother because he
[Guest]: dies later and then she thinks oh i killed him because i jumped over his body and he stopped
[Guest]: growing which means he died so basically there are all these superstitions that are knit into
[Guest]: the story and right at the end uh she's traveling in a train where the brother has died and they
[Guest]: have not been told what exactly because she's a child she's eight years old and she has not been
[Guest]: told what has happened really to the brother and she's still thinking that maybe he's alive maybe
[Guest]: he's just hurt or something and she looks out of the window and she looks at the sky where a swallow
[Guest]: is flying very high a bird is flying very high and she remembers that her brother the one who
[Guest]: has died had told her that a swallow is the freest bird because it flies so high it just flies the
[Guest]: highest bird and even the falcon can't get it so she immediately connects the two things and she
[Guest]: thinks that if that bird is a swallow then my brother is alive somehow that gets linked in her
[Guest]: mind and she's looks at her mother and she wants to ask her that question that is that bird a
[Guest]: swallow but then she doesn't have the courage to ask because what if the answer is no it's not a
[Guest]: swallow so she's just it ends at that moment so that story i still think it i like that story
[Guest]: and i still like it so that's one of the stories that has remained but yes i mean there are some
[Guest]: stories that i do like still but some of them are what crap why did i write this you know that kind
[Guest]: of and i can see the bulges the bulges that needn't have been there and should have been done
[Guest]: in a crafted in a more you know fine way and i can feel these are unnecessary passages and they
[Guest]: could have why am i describing so much stuff like that i i guess all writers feel like that after
[Amit Varma]: a point in time so you know before we kind of wind up what's next for you what are you planning to
[Amit Varma]: write what are you working on will we see translations of your work anytime soon like you
[Amit Varma]: know i am in any case i want to start reading hindi it's been something has been saying for a
[Guest]: long time well i i hope somebody will translate them people ask me why don't you translate them
[Guest]: since you are a translator yourself but i mean there are so many people that i can translate
[Guest]: why should i translate my own i mean this this has come up you know that i should translate and
[Amit Varma]: because i loved your translations of your two stories i mean obviously i haven't read the
[Amit Varma]: originals but he's read really well and i i think would also appeal to international audiences for
[Guest]: that matter yeah but if somebody would do them then it's fine but i i mean i don't know not not
[Guest]: for the moment because i don't know if at some point i changed my mind that's something different
[Guest]: but i mean not now so at the moment you asked i mean i'm working on those essays i told you
[Guest]: autobiographical essays in english and those should be finished i think as soon as i get back
[Guest]: to Allahabad i'll probably need another 15 days to finish it because it's all done that you just
[Guest]: need one more chapter and and my book the new hindi stories book is coming out the proofs are
[Guest]: waiting for me i have to look at the proofs and that book will be out by the before the end of
[Guest]: the year so that's there and then i'll begin on another sort of maybe a novel or maybe another
[Guest]: collection of short stories have you ever thought of writing in english uh fiction not really i mean
[Guest]: except for that the novel that i wrote i wrote it first in english and i didn't think it worked i
[Guest]: didn't think i thought it sounded better in hindi so maybe one day i will but somehow i think
[Guest]: it has to be grounded in the language of the context yeah i mean if it's let's see i'm i'm
[Guest]: open to sort of looking at things maybe once i've got past this autobiographical essays which are
[Guest]: also part of it you know it's never actually how it happened you always add and you know subtract
[Guest]: from things so maybe i could write a book of fiction i'm not sure i'm not sure but i'll
[Amit Varma]: certainly write another book after this wonderful two final questions one is what advice would you
[Amit Varma]: give young writers listening to this like i know you've already spoken about the advice you would
[Amit Varma]: give yourself which is you know write more and engage more with life and so on in addition to
[Amit Varma]: that you know what are the common mistakes you see young people making what what advice
[Guest]: well don't be in a hurry don't be in a hurry don't be in a hurry to publish write something
[Guest]: and polish it and refine it and revise it many times before you can actually and don't write
[Guest]: about things that are you think that this will sell or don't write for the wrong reasons you know
[Guest]: so write for what you actually feel what you feel passionate about what you are committed to i think
[Amit Varma]: that is important in writing yeah and that is what will so the final question you know listeners of
[Amit Varma]: the show often enjoy it when guest recommend books for them so what are the books across languages
[Amit Varma]: what are the books which have meant so much to you that you want to tell people that read this
[Guest]: now you must read this what what are those well because we've been through this recently been
[Guest]: through the pandemic and this whole thing of nature and how nature is sort of rebelling
[Guest]: against what we've been doing to it so i've been reading two or three books around nature
[Guest]: one of them is a moth snowstorm about by this british guy called michael mccarthy i think
[Guest]: that's his name and it's also a memoir plus it's a revealing in the joy of nature so it's
[Guest]: connection with nature so that's beautiful and there's another one which is a similar book but
[Guest]: it's also a kind of memoir but it's called h is for hawk and h is for hawk by helen mcdonald
[Guest]: helen mcdonald yeah that's also very lovely and it's also a memoir and it's got in fact several
[Guest]: genres kind of mixed together in it so it's a very complex literary style also then there was
[Guest]: a third book which i enjoyed which was also around nature it's about birds the genius of birds
[Guest]: it's by jennifer ackerman and it's about how intelligent birds are and what like there's this
[Guest]: uh calironian crow i think it is with that or one of these birds i forget which one it was that
[Guest]: hides 30 000 seeds you know across these uh and so many acres of land and it remembers exactly
[Guest]: where it hit those seeds months later or years later it just remembers and they're very very
[Guest]: intelligent birds so this whole thing of saying oh this one has a bird brain is complete complete
[Guest]: nonsense you know birds are very intelligent so i've been reading that and then the languages of
[Guest]: course i read hindi and i read urdu so in hindi as a writer i would recommend is vinod marsukal
[Guest]: who's very good and i'm very close to his writing and the other one is jyotsna milan she's also
[Guest]: she's i think a very fundamental feminist i mean she would not qualify as a feminist in what
[Guest]: they now the strident feminism but she's like she goes to the nuts and bolts of feminism she looks
[Guest]: at what a woman is you know right from she views a woman from inside as it were and it's she's
[Guest]: wonderful in that so there's jyotsna milan and there's uh uh nirmal varma of course who's quite
[Guest]: well known to people premchand if people haven't read premchand premchand is there then urdu
[Guest]: is nair masood he's my all-time favorite he's there and uh ismat chuktai and uh i mean we read
[Guest]: this uh what's the i just mentioned that name umrao jaan umrao jaanada so that's very good
[Guest]: so there are all these across languages and most of these are translated jyotsna milan perhaps not
[Guest]: very much translated i've translated one story but uh they are all all these others are translated
[Amit Varma]: so they can be found by the readers who only read english fantastic list and uh you know about you
[Guest]: spoke about those three uh books about wilderness different aspects of it have you read the hidden
[Guest]: life of trees by no i haven't actually that's been on my reading list for a long time that
[Amit Varma]: what's his name german sound peter volleben peter volleben and by the forward by pradeep
[Amit Varma]: krishnan exactly you must read that that's also i've just i've got that on my list so although
[Amit Varma]: my final question is over i might as well go to a final digression which is you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: jyotsna milan being a fundamental feminist yeah different from what it's like today yeah can you
[Guest]: elaborate on that that's very interesting uh well she's sort of looking at the woman i'll tell you
[Guest]: i'll give you a an example from her story there's one story of hers uh again i've forgotten the
[Guest]: title but i mean there's a funeral happening this woman has died and this other woman who's
[Guest]: the narrator of the story she comes to the funeral and this woman is right and they're
[Guest]: talking about her she had no demands of her own but this woman on the one of the few days before
[Guest]: she died she tells her sister or her sister-in-law that i feel i just feel like strangling you i mean
[Guest]: she says and then she starts fearing her own hands and that she feels that something may happen to
[Guest]: her that she you know some there's a kind of hidden violence in her stories which is the rage
[Guest]: that these women feel who have been depressed and oppressed and all that and they have this kind of
[Guest]: anger inside them so she just doesn't know it's like it's coming from somewhere i mean her
[Guest]: subconscious because she's you know and she just says these things and she's never been like that
[Guest]: and on the surface she's this very compliant obedient sort of person so she's so she's not
[Guest]: kind of gets into the mind of such women and she's sort of looking at the woman from inside she's not
[Guest]: you know she's i mean what it is to be a woman she's looking at that no which which makes her a
[Guest]: very uh very kind of i think a very fun feminism at the very basic level you know she has to get
[Guest]: to anything else first you have to get past the figure of the woman you have to know what the
[Guest]: woman is feeling what she's going through all that you have to know no so i call her feminist
[Amit Varma]: in that sense wow that's that's fascinating sarah thank you so much for coming on my show
[Guest]: it's such an honor for me thank you for having me i enjoyed that
[Amit Varma]: if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over to the show notes enter rabbit holes at will
[Amit Varma]: sarah is not on social media a smart woman but you can head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and dig into her books you can follow me on twitter at amit verma amit varma you can
[Amit Varma]: browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen.in thank you for listening
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking thank you